CHAPTER 24




* * *





Hydraulic Engineer



DIVERTING THE ARNO


In his job application to Ludovico Sforza, Leonardo had boasted of his talent for “guiding water from one place to another.” That was, at best, an exaggeration. When he first arrived in Milan, in 1482, he had done no hydraulic engineering. But like many of his fantasy aspirations, he willed this one into reality. During his years in Milan, he diligently studied the city’s system of canals, and he recorded in his notebooks details of the mechanisms of the locks and other feats of water engineering. In particular, he was fascinated by the city’s artificial canals, including the Naviglio Grande, begun in the twelfth century, and the Naviglio Martesana, which was under construction while he lived there.1

Milan’s waterworks had existed for centuries, even before the Romans built their famed aqueducts in the Po Valley around 200 BC. The flow of water each spring from the melting snow of the Alps was carefully managed in accordance with rules devised by ancient tribes to create controlled floods for the grain fields. Irrigation networks were created, and canals were built that both channeled water and facilitated barge shipping. By the time Leonardo moved to Milan, the system of large canals was three centuries old, and the duchy there raised much of its revenue from the sale of water allocations. Leonardo himself was at one point compensated with a water allocation, and his design for an ideal city near Milan was based on using man-made canals and waterways.2

In Florence, by contrast, there had been no major hydraulic works since ancient times. The city had few canals, drainage projects, irrigation systems, or river diversions. With the knowledge he had soaked up in Milan and his fascination with the flow of water, he set out to change that. In his notebooks, he began sketching ways that Florence could copy Milan.

Florence had controlled the town of Pisa, just over fifty miles down the Arno River toward the coast of the Mediterranean, for much of the fifteenth century. This was critical for Florence, which had no other outlet to the sea. But in 1494 Pisa managed to wriggle away and become a free republic. Florence’s middling army was incapable of breaching Pisa’s walls, and it could not successfully blockade the town because the Arno gave it access to supplies from the sea.

Just before Pisa broke away, a major world event made Florence even more eager to control a sea outlet. In March 1493 Christopher Columbus returned safely from his first voyage across the Atlantic Ocean, and the report of his discoveries quickly spread throughout Europe. This was soon followed by a flurry of other accounts of amazing explorations. Amerigo Vespucci, whose cousin Agostino worked with Machiavelli in the Florentine chancery, helped supply Columbus’s third voyage in 1498, and the following year he made his own voyage across the Atlantic, landing in what is now Brazil. Unlike Columbus, who thought he was finding a route to India, Vespucci correctly reported to his Florentine patrons that he had “arrived at a new land which for many reasons . . . we observed to be a continent.” His correct surmise led to its being named America, after him. The excitement over what portended to be a new age of exploration made Florence’s desire to regain Pisa more urgent.3

In July 1503, a few months after he left Borgia’s service, Leonardo was sent to join Florence’s army at the fortress of Verruca, a square fortification atop a rocky outcropping (verruca means “wart”) overlooking the Arno seven miles east of Pisa.4 “Leonardo da Vinci himself came here with his companions, and we showed him everything, and we think that he likes La Verruca very much,” a field commissary reported back to the Florentine authorities. “He said that he was thinking of making it impregnable.”5 An entry for an account book in Florence that month lists a set of expenses and then adds, “This money has been spent to provide six horse coaches and to pay the board expenses for the expedition with Leonardo in the territory of Pisa to divert the Arno from its course and take it away from Pisa.”6

Diverting the Arno River from its course and taking it away from Pisa? It was an audacious way to reconquer the city without storming the wall or wielding any weapons. If the river could be channeled somewhere else, Pisa would be cut off from the sea and lose its source of supply. The primary advocates of the idea included the two clever friends who had been holed up together that past winter in Imola, Leonardo da Vinci and Niccolò Machiavelli.

“The river that is to be diverted from one course to another must be coaxed and not treated roughly or with violence,” Leonardo wrote in his notebook. His plan was to dig a huge ditch, thirty-two feet deep, upriver from Pisa and use dams to divert the water from the river into the ditch. “To do this a sort of dam must be inserted into the river, then another one further downstream jutting out beyond it, and similarly third, fourth, and fifth dams, so that the river may discharge itself into the channel made for it.”7

This would require moving a million tons of earth, and Leonardo calculated the man-hours necessary by doing a detailed time-and-motion study, one of the first in history. He figured out everything from the weight of one shovel-load of dirt (twenty-five pounds) to how many shovel-loads would fill a wheelbarrow (twenty). His answer: it would take approximately 1.3 million man-hours, or 540 men working 100 days, to dig the Arno diversion ditch.

At first he considered ways to use wheeled carts to carry the dirt away, showing why those with three wheels were more efficient than those with four. But he realized that it would be very difficult to push carts up the banks of a ditch. So he designed one of his ingenious machines (fig. 89), which features two crane-like arms that would move lines with twenty-four buckets. When a bucket deposited its dirt on top of the bank of the ditch, a worker would get in it and ride down to keep the weights counterbalanced. Leonardo also designed a treadmill system to harness human power to move the cranes.8

Fig. 89. Machine for digging canals.



When digging began on the diversion ditch in August 1504, it was overseen by a new waterworks engineer, who revised Leonardo’s plans and decided not to build the dirt-moving machine. Instead of one deep ditch, as Leonardo designed, the new engineer decided to dig two ditches and to make them shallower than the bed of the Arno, which Leonardo knew would not work. In fact, the ditches ended up being only fourteen feet deep rather than the thirty-two feet that Leonardo had specified. After consulting Leonardo in Florence, Machiavelli wrote a blunt warning to the engineer: “We fear that the bed of the ditch is shallower than the bed of the Arno; this would have negative effects and in our opinion it would not direct the project to the end we wish.”

The warning was ignored, but it turned out to be well founded. When the ditch was opened to the Arno, Machiavelli’s assistant on the scene reported, “the waters never went through the ditches except when the river was in flood, and as soon as it subsided the water flowed back.” A few weeks later, in early October, a violent storm caused the walls of the ditches to collapse, flooding the nearby farms but still not diverting the main course of the Arno. The project was abandoned.9

Even though it failed, the project to divert the Arno rekindled Leonardo’s interest in a larger scheme: creating a navigable waterway between Florence and the Mediterranean Sea. Near Florence the Arno River often silted up, and it also had a series of waterfalls and rapids that kept boats from passing. Leonardo’s solution was to bypass that part of the river with a canal. “Sluices should be made in the valley of la Chiana at Arezzo, so that when, in the summer, the Arno lacks water, the canal may not remain dry,” he wrote. “Let this canal be twenty braccia [forty feet] wide.” The plan would help mills and agriculture in the surrounding region, he suggested, so other towns would likely fund it.10

Fig. 90. Topographic view of the Chiana Valley.



Leonardo drew a variety of maps in 1504 showing how the canal would work. One of them, done with brush and ink, was pricked with pins, evidence that he had made copies.11 Another, done in delicate color with arresting details of tiny towns and fortifications, showed his plan to turn the swampy marshes of the Val di Chiana into a reservoir (fig. 90).12 The fiasco of the Arno diversion project probably persuaded the cash-strapped Florentine leaders not to attempt something even more ambitious, so Leonardo’s canal proposals were shelved.





DRAINING THE PIOMBINO MARSHES


The failure of these projects did not immediately persuade Leonardo to give up hydraulic engineering, nor did his patrons want him to. At the end of October 1504, just weeks after the Arno diversion was abandoned, he was sent by the Florentine authorities, at Machiavelli’s request, to provide technical assistance to the ruler of Piombino, a port city sixty miles south of Pisa that Florence was seeking to turn into an ally. Leonardo had been to Piombino two years earlier, while in the service of Cesare Borgia, and had studied the fortifications and looked at ways to drain the surrounding marshes. On this second visit, he spent two months designing a series of fortifications, moats, and secret passageways that could be used if the ruler was betrayed, “as happened at Fossombrone,” a reference to Borgia’s use of treachery in capturing that town.

The centerpiece of Leonardo’s design was a circular fortress. Inside it had three rings of walls, with spaces between them that could be flooded and turned into moats during an attack. Leonardo had been studying the force exerted by objects hitting a wall at different angles, and he knew that the potency of a strike diminished as the angle became more oblique. Rounded walls, rather than straight ones, were thus more likely to deflect a cannonball. “It was Leonardo’s most remarkable conception in the field of military engineering, and represented a total rethinking of the principles of fortification,” Martin Kemp wrote. “Nowhere are Leonardo’s theoretical principles, his sense of form, and his observational acumen more brilliantly combined than in the circular fortress designs.”13

Leonardo’s hydraulic challenge at Piombino was draining the marshlands surrounding the castle. His first idea was to divert some muddy water from the river into the marsh and allow the silt, dirt, and pebbles to settle to build up the land, similar to what is now being attempted with the marshes in southern Louisiana. Shallow channels would drain away the clear surface water, allowing more muddy water to enter.

Then he came up with another approach that was far more ambitious. At first glance, his plan may seem to skirt his blurred border with fantasy, but like many of his fantasies the basic idea is a good one ahead of its time. Drawing on his love of vortexes and eddies and swirling water, he sketched a way to create a “centrifugal pump” in the sea that was near the marsh. The idea was to stir the seawater in a circular way and thus create an artificial whirlpool. Tubes could then be used to siphon the water from the swamp and have it be sucked into the vortex of the whirlpool, which would be lower than the level of the marsh. In two separate notebooks, Leonardo described and drew a “method for drying up the swamps which border on the sea.” The artificial whirlpool in the sea would be created by a “board that is turned by an axel,” and “the siphon would expel its water at the back of the turning board.” His drawings are extremely detailed and even include the width and speed that would be required of the artificial whirlpool.14 Although it proved impractical, the theory was correct.

Typical of Leonardo, he also jotted down some observations on color and painting while in Piombino, observing closely the way sunlight and the reflected light from the sea colored the hull of a ship: “I saw the greenish shadows cast by the ropes, mast and spars on a white wall, as the sunlight struck it. The wall surface which was not lit by the sun took on the color of the sea.”15

The Arno projects, the circular fortress, and the draining of the Piombino swamps had one thing in common with many of Leonardo’s grandest projects, and even some of his less grand ones: they never came to fruition. They showed Leonardo at his most fantastical, dreaming up schemes that darted back and forth across the boundaries of practicality. Like the construction of his flying machines, they were too fanciful to execute.

This inability to ground his fantasies in reality has generally been regarded as one of Leonardo’s major failings. Yet in order to be a true visionary, one has to be willing to overreach and to fail some of the time. Innovation requires a reality distortion field. The things he envisioned for the future often came to pass, even if it took a few centuries. Scuba gear, flying machines, and helicopters now exist. Suction pumps now drain swamps. Along the route of the canal that Leonardo drew there is now a major highway. Sometimes fantasies are paths to reality.





