CHAPTER 20




* * *





Florence Again



THE RETURN


Leonardo’s first stop on his journey back to Florence in early 1500 was the town of Mantua. There he was hosted by Isabella d’Este, the sister of Ludovico’s late wife, Beatrice. An avid and spoiled art collector from one of Italy’s most venerable families, Isabella was eager to have a portrait of her done by Leonardo, and during his short stay he dutifully made a preparatory chalk drawing.

From there he went to Venice, where he offered military advice on defending against a threatened Turkish invasion. Always interested in the flow of water and its military uses, he devised a mobile wooden lock that he believed could allow the Isonzo River to flood a valley that would be used by any invaders.1 Like many of his visionary schemes, it was never implemented.

He also dreamed up ideas for protecting a port such as Venice by equipping a corps of underwater defenders with diving suits, breathing gear, goggles, a mask, and wineskin airbags. The mask was attached to cane tubes that led up to a diving bell floating on the surface. After sketching some of these items in his notebook, he wrote that he was keeping a few of his plans secret: “Why is it that I do not describe my method for remaining underwater and how long I can remain there without coming up for air? I do not wish to publish this because of the evil nature of men, who might use it for murder on the sea bed.”2 As with many of his inventions, his scuba gear was, at least during his time, just over the edge of practicality. It would be centuries before his ideas came to fruition.

When Leonardo reached Florence in late March 1500, he found a city that had just lived through a reactionary spasm that threatened to destroy its role in the vanguard of Renaissance culture. In 1494 a radical friar named Girolamo Savonarola had led a religious rebellion against the ruling Medici and instituted a fundamentalist regime that imposed strict new laws against homosexuality, sodomy, and adultery. Some transgressions were punished by stoning and burning. A militia of young boys was organized to patrol the streets and enforce morals. On Mardi Gras of 1497 Savonarola led what became known as the “Bonfire of the Vanities,” in which books, art, clothing, and cosmetics were set aflame. The following year, popular opinion turned on him, and he was hanged and burned in the central square of Florence. By Leonardo’s return, the city had again become a republic that celebrated the classics and art, but its confidence was shaken, its exuberance dampened, and the finances of its government and guilds drained.

Leonardo would make Florence his base for most of 1500 to 1506, boarding comfortably with his entourage at the church of Santissima Annunziata. In many ways, it would be the most productive period of his life. There he began two of his greatest panel paintings, the Mona Lisa and Virgin and Child with Saint Anne, as well as an image of Leda and the swan that is now lost. As an engineer, he would find work consulting on buildings, such as a structurally challenging church, and serving the military aims of Cesare Borgia. And in his spare time, he would immerse himself again in mathematical and anatomical studies.





LIFE AT FIFTY


As Leonardo approached the age of fifty, living again in Florence, where he and his family were well-known, he was comfortable being a distinctive character. Rather than try to conform, he made a point of being different, dressing and carrying himself as a dandy. At one point he made an inventory in his notebook of clothing he had stored in a trunk. “One gown made of taffeta,” he began. “One velvet lining that can be used as a gown. One Arab burnouse. One gown of dusty rose. One rose-colored Catalan gown. One cape of dark purple with wide collar and velvet hood. One coat of dark purple satin. One coat of crimson satin. One pair of dark purple stockings. One pair of dusty-rose stockings. One pink cap.”3 These might seem like costumes from one of his plays or masquerades, but we know from contemporary accounts that he actually dressed like this when walking about town. It is a delightful image: Leonardo in an Arab hooded cloak or strolling in purple and pink garb, heavy on the satin and velvet. He was tailor-made for a Florence that had rebelled against Savonarola’s Bonfire of the Vanities and was again willing to embrace flamboyant, eccentric, and artistic free spirits.

Leonardo made sure that his companion Salai, then twenty-four, was dressed with similar brio, usually also in pink and rose. In one entry Leonardo noted, “On this day I paid Salai three gold ducats which he said he wanted for a pair of rose-colored hose with their trimming.” The trimmings on the stocking must have been jewels. Four days later, he bought Salai a cloak of silver cloth with green velvet trim.4

In the list Leonardo made of the clothing he had stored in a trunk, it is telling that his own clothes and those of Salai are mixed together, unlike the possessions of anyone else in the household. The clothes included “a cape in the French mode, once owned by Cesare Borgia, belonging to Salai.” Apparently Leonardo had cloaked his young companion in a cape given to him by the notoriously vicious warlord who was briefly his father figure. If Freud had only known. The trunk also contained “a tunic laced in the French fashion, belonging to Salai,” and “a tunic of gray Flemish cloth, belonging to Salai.”5 These are not the types of garment that Leonardo, or anyone else of the time, bought for an ordinary house servant.

It’s reassuring to discover that Leonardo spent as much on books as he did on clothes. In the inventories he made in 1504, he listed 116 volumes. These included Ptolemy’s Cosmography, which he later cited in describing the human circulation and respiratory system as a microcosm of the earth’s. He also acquired more books on math, including a three-volume translation of Euclid and a book he described as being about “the squaring of the circle,” which was probably a text by Archimedes. There are many more texts on surgery, medicine, and architecture, but his tastes also ran to more popular fare. By then he owned three editions of Aesop’s fables and multiple volumes of bawdy verse. He had also acquired the book on architecture written by his friend from Milan, Francesco di Giorgio, who had been a collaborator in conceiving Vitruvian Man. He made annotations throughout and copied some passages and drawings into his notebook.6





ISABELLA D’ESTE’S UNPAINTED PORTRAIT


We can get an impression of Leonardo’s life in Florence at this time by looking at the amusing tale of a commission he did not take. Soon after he arrived, he was besieged by entreaties from Isabella d’Este to fulfill his promise to paint a picture for her, either a portrait based on the chalk drawing he had made of her when he passed through Mantua or, short of that, any other subject he chose. The saga of the two willful people, with a beleaguered friar caught in the middle, turned out to be so prolonged that it became, at least in retrospect, humorous as well as revealing of Leonardo’s unwillingness to fulfill commissions that bored him. It also tells us about his interests in Florence, dilatory style, and aloof attitude toward wealthy patrons.

Isabella, a strong-willed first lady of Mantua and a stronger-willed patron of art, was twenty-six at the time. She was the daughter of the Duke of Ferrara and a scion of the Este family, the richest and oldest noble clan in Italy. She had received a rigorous classical education in Latin, Greek, history, and music. From the age of six, she had been betrothed to Francesco Gonzaga, the Marquess of Mantua. Isabella brought a dowry of 25,000 gold ducats (worth more than $3 million at 2017 gold prices), and her wedding in 1491 was lavish. After arriving in Mantua from Ferrara in a flotilla of more than fifty boats, she rode through the streets in a gold chariot cheered by seventeen thousand spectators and accompanied by ambassadors from a dozen realms.7

In an era of conspicuous consumption and competitive collecting, Isabella became the most conspicuous and competitive. She also triumphed in a tumultuous marriage. Her husband was a weak leader who was often away, at one point held hostage for three years in Venice, and she served as regent and took command of the city’s military, holding off enemies. In return, her ungrateful husband conducted a long, passionate, and public affair with the notoriously beautiful and evil Lucrezia Borgia, who was married to Isabella’s brother. (It was Lucrezia’s third marriage. Her own brother, the brutal Cesare Borgia, had ordered her second husband to be strangled before her eyes.)

Isabella channeled her emotions into collecting art and, more specifically, seeking suitable portraits of herself. That proved difficult, because artists made the mistake of trying to produce passable likenesses, all of which she decried as making her look too fat. The respected Mantua court artist Andrea Mantegna tried in 1493, but Isabella pronounced, “The painter has done it so badly that it does not look like us in the least.”

After a couple of other unsatisfactory portraits, she tried again with a painter who worked for her family in Ferrara, but when she sent it to Milan as a gift, she apologized to Ludovico Sforza. “I am afraid that I shall weary, not only Your Highness, but all Italy with the sight of my portraits,” she wrote. “I send this one, which is not really very good and makes me look fatter than I am.” Ludovico, who apparently did not know the proper response to a woman who said a portrait made her look fat, responded that he thought the picture was a good likeness. At one point Isabella lamented, “We only wish that we could be as well served by painters as we are by men of letters.” Presumably, the many poets who dedicated poems to her could take more literary license with a subject than a painter could.8

In her continuing quest for the right artist to paint her, Isabella turned her sights on Leonardo. In 1498, soon after the death of her sister Beatrice, who had been married to Ludovico, Isabella wrote to Ludovico’s mistress Cecilia Gallerani, the subject of Leonardo’s Lady with an Ermine. She wanted to compare that portrait to ones done by the Venetian painter Giovanni Bellini to determine which of the two artists would be her next target. “Having seen today some fine portraits by the hand of Giovanni Bellini, we began to discuss the works of Leonardo, and wished we could compare them with these paintings,” she wrote. “And since we remember that he painted your likeness, we beg you to be so good as to send us your portrait by this messenger whom we have dispatched on horseback, so that we may not only be able to compare the works of the two masters, but also have the pleasure of seeing your face again.” She promised to return it. “I send it without delay,” Cecilia replied, adding that it was no longer a good likeness. “But Your Highness must not think this proceeds from any defect in the master, for indeed I think there is no other painter to equal him in the world, but merely because the portrait was painted when I was much younger.” Isabella liked the painting, but she kept her word and returned it to Cecilia.9

When Leonardo made his chalk drawing of Isabella on his way from Milan to Florence in early 1500, he also made a copy. He took it with him and showed it to a friend, who reported back to Isabella, “[The] portrait is exactly like you, and it could not be done better.”10 Leonardo had left the original drawing with Isabella, who in her flurry of subsequent correspondence asked him to send a replacement because her husband had given it away. “Will you also beg him to send us another drawing of our portrait,” she wrote her agent, “since His Lordship our consort has given away the one which he left here?”11

The copy that Leonardo carried with him, which was large enough to be a preparatory cartoon for a painting, is likely the same drawing that is now in the Louvre (fig. 77). The portraits that Leonardo had painted in Milan show the sitters in Spanish-influenced dress, which had been the fashion. But Isabella was a trendsetter, and Leonardo drew her dressed in the very latest from France. That had an advantage: the loose sleeves and bodice hid her plumpness, though Leonardo gave her the hint of a double chin only slightly disguised by his chalky sfumato. There is a willfulness to her mouth and a dignified formality in the choice of a profile pose, which was the standard for portraits of royalty.

Fig. 77. Drawing of Isabella d’Este.



In most of his portraits, and all of those that were fully painted, Leonardo avoided the conventional approach of the period, which was to portray subjects in profile. Instead, he preferred to show his subjects facing the viewer or in three-quarters view, which allowed him to imbue them with a sense of motion and psychological engagement. Ginevra de’ Benci, Cecilia Gallerani, Lucrezia Crivelli, and Mona Lisa are posed this way.

But these women were not royalty; two were mistresses of Ludovico and two were upper-class wives. Isabella instead insisted on being portrayed in the classical profile that conveyed courtly decorum. As a result, Leonardo’s drawing of her is lackluster. We cannot see into her eyes or mind or soul. She seems to be posing. No thoughts or emotions seem to be churning inside. The fact that she could have viewed Cecilia’s Lady with an Ermine and then asked Leonardo for a conventional pose indicates that she had more money than taste. That may be one reason Leonardo had no desire to turn the drawing into a painting.12

Even though this drawing was pricked for transferring onto a panel, Leonardo showed no signs of fulfilling Isabella’s request to produce a portrait painting. She was used to getting what she wanted, however, and after waiting a full year, she decided to launch a lobbying campaign. Caught in the middle was a well-connected friar named Pietro da Novellara, who had been Isabella’s confessor.

“If Leonardo the Florentine, the painter, is to be found in Florence, we beg you will inform us what he is doing and whether he has begun any work,” she wrote Pietro in late March 1501. “Your Reverence might find out, as you best know how, if he would undertake to paint a picture for our studio.”13

The friar’s reply, sent on April 3, gives a glimpse into what Leonardo was doing and his reluctance to make commitments. “From what I hear, Leonardo’s life is very irregular and uncertain, and he seems to live for the day only,” Pietro wrote. His only art, the friar reported, was a preparatory drawing for what would eventually become his great painting of the Virgin and Child with Saint Anne. “He has done nothing else, excepting that two of his apprentices are painting portraits to which he sometimes adds a few touches.”

As usual, Leonardo was distracted by other pursuits. As the friar said at the end of his letter, “He devotes much of his time to geometry, and has no fondness at all for the paintbrush.” He repeated that message after Salai arranged for him to meet with Leonardo. “I have succeeded in learning the intentions of the painter Leonardo by means of his pupil, Salai, and some of his other friends, who took me to see him on Wednesday,” Pietro wrote on April 14. “In truth, his mathematical experiments have absorbed his thoughts so entirely that he cannot bear the sight of a paintbrush.”

As always, Leonardo was charming, even when he was not being accommodating. One issue was that, when Louis XII of France took Milan, Leonardo had committed to do some paintings for him and his secretary, Florimond Robertet. “If he can get free from his engagement with the King of France without displeasing him, which he hopes to do by the end of a month at latest, he would rather serve Your Excellency than any other person in the world,” Pietro wrote, stretching the truth. “But, in any case, as soon as he has finished a little picture which he is doing for a certain Robertet, a favorite of the King of France, he will do your portrait immediately.” The friar described a painting Leonardo was working on that would become Madonna of the Yarnwinder. He ended with a note of resignation: “This is all that I could get from him.”14

Had he wished to comply with Isabella, it would have been a lucrative commission, one that he could have mostly delegated to his assistants. But Leonardo, although not wealthy, was beyond that. He occasionally led his patrons on—perhaps he even thought he might eventually gratify their wishes—but he rarely allowed himself to be subservient to them. When Isabella wrote to him directly in July 1501, he didn’t even deign to send back a formal answer. “I gave him to understand that if he wished to reply I could forward his letters on to Your Ladyship and thus save his costs,” reported Isabella’s agent. “He read your letter and said he would do so, but hearing nothing more from him I finally sent one of my men to him to learn what he wished to do. He sent back the answer that for now he was not in a position to send another reply to Your Ladyship, but that I should advise you that he has already begun work on that which Your Ladyship wanted from him.” He ended his letter with the same resigned lament as Pietro had used. “In short, this is as much as I have been able to get from the said Leonardo.”15

Three years later, despite all the entreaties, Leonardo had not sent a painting, nor is there any evidence that he had begun one. Finally, in May 1504, Isabella changed tactics and asked him to paint for her instead a picture of the young Jesus. “When you were in this city and drew our portrait in chalk, you promised us that you would some day paint it in colors,” she wrote. “But because this would be almost impossible, since you are unable to come here, we beg you to keep your promise by converting our portrait into another figure, which would be still more acceptable to us, that is to say, a youthful Christ of about twelve years old.”16

Although she implied she would pay whatever he wanted, Leonardo was unmoved. Salai, not surprisingly, was more mercenary, and in January 1505 he offered his own services to do such a painting. “A pupil of Leonardo Vinci, Salai by name, young in years but very talented . . . has a great wish to do some gallant thing for Your Excellency,” her agent reported, “so if you desire a little picture from him, you have only to tell me the price you are ready to pay.”17 Isabella declined the offer.

The final chapter came in 1506, when Isabella personally went to Florence. She was not able to meet with Leonardo, who was staying in the countryside doing studies on the flight of birds, but she did meet with Alessandro Amadori, the brother of Leonardo’s stepmother, Albiera. He promised to use his influence. “Here in Florence, I act at all hours as the representative of Your Excellency with Leonardo da Vinci, my nephew,” he wrote in May, after she returned to Mantua, “and I do not cease to urge him by every argument in my power to satisfy your desire and paint the figure for which you asked him. This time he has really promised me that he will soon begin the work and satisfy your wish.”18

Needless to say, Leonardo did not. He was pursuing more ambitious paintings as well as his endeavors in anatomy, engineering, math, and science. Painting a conventional portrait for a pushy patron did not interest him. Nor did money motivate him. He painted portraits if the subject struck his fancy, such as the Musician, or if a powerful ruler demanded it, as in the case of Ludovico with his mistresses. But he didn’t dance to the music of patrons.





MADONNA OF THE YARNWINDER


Friar Pietro, in one of his letters to the persistent Isabella, described a painting that Leonardo was doing at the request of Louis XII’s secretary, Florimond Robertet. “The little picture he is working on is of a Madonna who is seated as if she were about to spin yarn,” he wrote, “and the child has placed his foot in the basket of yarns and has grasped the yarnwinder, and stares attentively at the four spokes, which are in the form of a cross, and he smiles and grips it tightly, as if he were longing for this cross, not wishing to yield it to his mother, who appears to want to take it away from him.”19

Dozens of versions of this picture, either by Leonardo or his assistants and followers, still exist, and there has been much debate by experts, as well as some advocacy by owners and dealers, regarding which might be the one Leonardo himself painted and sent to Robertet. Two of the surviving versions, known as the Buccleuch Madonna and the Lansdowne Madonna (fig. 78), are considered most likely to reflect the most involvement of Leonardo’s own hand. But the quest to designate the “real” or “original” Leonardo version actually misses the larger meaning of the tale of the Yarnwinders. When he returned to Florence in 1500, Leonardo set up a collaborative workshop, and production of some pictures, especially small devotional ones, became a team effort, just as it had been in Verrocchio’s studio.20

The emotional power of the Yarnwinder scene comes from the psychological complexity and intensity of the baby Jesus as he contemplates and grapples with the yarnwinder, which is in the shape of a cross. Other painters had shown Jesus looking at objects that foretold the Passion, as Leonardo had done in the devotional paintings of the Madonna and Child he had made Benois Madonna and other little paintings in his early years. But the Yarnwinder paintings are energized by what had become Leonardo’s special ability to convey a psychological narrative.

There is a flow of physical motions as Jesus reaches toward the cross-like object, his finger pointed heavenward, the gesture that Leonardo loved. His moist eyes are shiny with a tiny sparkle of luster, and they have their own narrative: he is just the age when a baby can discern objects and focus on them, and he is doing so with a concerted effort that combines his sight with his sense of touch. We sense that his ability to focus on the cross causes a premonition of his fate. He looks innocent and at first playful, but if you look at his mouth and eyes you sense a resigned and even loving comfort with what will be his destiny. By comparing Madonna of the Yarnwinder to the Benois Madonna (fig. 13), we can see the historic leap Leonardo made by turning static scenes into emotion-laden narratives.

Fig. 78. Madonna of the Yarnwinder (Lansdowne version).



Our eyes swirl counterclockwise as the narrative continues with Mary’s motions and emotions. Her face and her hand indicate anxiety, a desire to intervene, but also an understanding and an acceptance of what shall be. In the Virgin of the Rocks paintings (figs. 64 and 65), Mary’s hovering hand offers a serene benediction; in the Yarnwinders, her gesture is more conflicted, as if coiled to grasp her child while also recoiling from the temptation to intervene. She reaches out nervously, as if trying to decide whether to restrain him from his fate.

The Yarnwinder paintings are only the size of a page of a tabloid newspaper, but they include, especially in the Lansdowne version, Leonardo’s marks of genius. There are the tightly coiled and lustrous curls on both mother and child. There is the river winding down from the mystical and misty mountains as if it were an artery connecting the macrocosm of the earth to the veins of the two human bodies. He knew how to have the light play on her thin veil, making it look lighter than her skin but still letting the sunlight hit the top of her forehead and reflect back a shine. The sun highlights the leaves on the closest tree next to her knee, but as the trees recede so does their distinctness, as Leonardo prescribed in his writings on acuity perspective. Also reflecting his scientific exactitude are the sedimentary layers of rocks on which Jesus leans.

Leonardo’s picture arrived at the French court in 1507, and Salai possessed a similar picture when he died, according to an accounting of his estate. But there is no clear historical documentation that connects either of these to the Lansdowne and Buccleuch versions, or to any of the at least forty existing versions of the picture that have some claim to have been produced by Leonardo’s studio.

Given the lack of a historical record or documentary trail, people have used other methods to try to determine which of the Yarnwinder contenders is the “original.” One approach is connoisseurship, the ability of a true art expert with a refined eye to discern paintings by the master. Unfortunately, connoisseurship over the years, both in this case and others, has created more disagreements than it has resolved, and it has sometimes been proven wrong when new evidence arises.

Another approach is scientific and technical analysis, which has been made more potent recently with infrared reflectography and other tools using multispectral imagery. Oxford professor Martin Kemp and his graduate student Thereza Crowe Wells began such a process of analysis in the early 1990s on the Buccleuch and then the Lansdowne Madonnas. One of their surprising discoveries is that both paintings have underdrawings that seem to have been made by Leonardo directly on the wood panel. In other words, they were not copied or transferred from a master preparatory drawing. The two underdrawings are similar. But interestingly, they were significantly modified in the course of creating the paintings.

For example, in both underdrawings there is a faint group of figures that includes Joseph making a baby walker for Jesus. It appears that Leonardo decided, as both paintings were being done, that the little scene was too much of a distraction, so it was left out. This and other bits of technical evidence point to the likelihood that the Lansdowne and Buccleuch versions were painted in the studio at the same time, with Leonardo overseeing and probably using his own hand on both. He probably had more of a hand in the Lansdowne, and saw it to completion, given that it has the more Leonardesque landscape and lustrous curls.

At least five of the surviving versions of the painting include the little scene of Joseph building the baby walker. This indicates that these versions were being painted in Leonardo’s studio before he decided to eliminate that scene. In other words, the best way to make sense of the versions and variations of the painting is to imagine Leonardo in his studio creating and modifying the painting while his assistants are producing copies.

This aligns with the impression we get from Pietro da Novellara’s letter to Isabella d’Este, in which he describes the scene in Leonardo’s studio, where “two of his apprentices are painting portraits to which he sometimes adds a few touches.” In other words, we should put aside our romantic image of the artist alone in his studio creating works of genius. Instead, Leonardo’s studio was like a shop in which he devised a painting and his assistants worked with him to make multiple copies. This is similar to the way it had been in Verrocchio’s bottega. “The process of production is more in keeping with the commissioning of a superbly made chair from a major designer-craftsman,” Kemp wrote after the results of the technical analysis. “We do not ask if a certain glued joint in the chair was made by the head of the workshop or one of his assistants—providing the joint holds and looks good.”

In the case of the Madonna of the Yarnwinder, as it was with the two versions of the Virgin of the Rocks, we should modify the traditional questions asked by art historians: Which version is the “authentic” or “autograph” or “original” one? Which are mere “copies”? Instead, the proper and more interesting questions to ask are: How did the collaboration occur? What was the nature of the team and the teamwork? As with so many examples in history where creativity was turned into products, Leonardo’s Florence studio involved individual genius combined with teamwork. Both vision and execution were required.

Because it was delivered to the French court and extensively copied, Madonna of the Yarnwinder turned out to be one of Leonardo’s most influential paintings. Leonardo’s followers, such as Bernardino Luini and Raphael, and soon painters throughout Europe, upended the genre of staid Madonna-and-child devotional paintings, creating instead narratives of emotional drama. Raphael’s 1507 painting Madonna of the Pinks, for example, is often compared to Leonardo’s Benois Madonna, which it closely mimics, but in fact we can see that Raphael has also picked up on Leonardo’s ability in the Yarnwinder to imbue a work with psychological movements. The same is true of Luini’s Madonna of the Carnation and Madonna with Child and Young Saint John.

In addition, the Yarnwinder set the stage for one of the most richly layered of Leonardo’s masterpieces, another depiction of the emotional swirl that occurs when the baby Jesus apprehends his destiny, this one adding Mary’s mother, Saint Anne, to the drama.





