CHAPTER 27




* * *





Anatomy, Round Two



THE CENTENARIAN


Shortly before he left Florence in 1508, Leonardo was at the hospital of Santa Maria Nuova, where he struck up a conversation with a man who said he was more than a hundred years old and had never been ill. A few hours later, the old man quietly passed away “without any movement or sign of distress.”1 Leonardo proceeded to dissect his body, launching what would be, from 1508 to 1513, his second round of anatomical studies.

We should pause to imagine the dandy-dressing Leonardo, now in his mid-fifties and at the height of his fame as a painter, spending his night hours at an old hospital in his neighborhood talking to patients and dissecting bodies. It is another example of his relentless curiosity that would astonish us if we had not become so used to it.

Twenty years earlier, while living in Milan, he had filled notebooks with his first round of anatomy drawings, including beautiful renderings of the human skull. Now he picked up the work again, and on one of the pages, above a set of drawings of muscles and veins in a partially skinned cadaver, he drew a respectful little drawing of his centenarian’s peaceful face, eyes closed, moments after his death (fig. 102).2 Then, on thirty more pages, he proceeded to record his dissection.

Fig. 102. The centenarian and his muscles.



Leonardo’s hand was deft with both pen and scalpel. His close observation plus the strength of his visual memory made his drawings strikingly better than those in any anatomy texts before him. Mustering all of his draftsman’s techniques, he made detailed underdrawings in black chalk, then finished them with different colors of ink and washes. With his left-handed curved hatching lines, he gave shape and volume to the form of bones and muscles and with light lines added the tendons and fibers. Each bone and muscle was shown from three or four angles, sometimes in layers or in an exploded view, as if it were a piece of machinery he was deconstructing and delineating. The results are triumphs of both science and art.

His rudimentary dissecting tools took him down layer by layer even as the body, untreated, decomposed. First he showed the surface muscles of the old man, then the inside muscles and veins as he pulled off the skin. He started with the right arm and neck, then the torso. He noted how the spine was curved, then he got to the abdominal wall, the intestines, the stomach, and the membranes connecting them all. Finally he exposed the liver, which he said “resembled frozen bran both in color and substance.” He never reached the legs, perhaps because by then the body had decomposed too badly to make it bearable to handle. But there would be other dissections, probably twenty more, and by the time he finished his anatomy studies he would have beautifully illustrated every body part and limb.

In his quest to figure out how the centenarian died, Leonardo made a significant scientific discovery: he documented the process that leads to arteriosclerosis, in which the walls of arteries are thickened and stiffened by the accumulation of plaque-like substances. “I made an autopsy in order to ascertain the cause of so peaceful a death, and found that it proceeded from weakness through the failure of blood and of the artery that feeds the heart and the other lower members, which I found to be very dry, shrunken and withered,” he wrote. Next to a drawing of the veins in the right arm, he compared the centenarian’s blood vessels to those of a two-year-old boy who also died at the hospital. He found those of the boy to be supple and unconstricted, “contrary to what I found in the old man.” Using his skill of thinking and describing through analogies, he concluded, “The network of vessels behaves in man as in oranges, in which the peel becomes tougher and the pulp diminishes the older they become.”3

The constriction of blood flow had caused, among other things, the centenarian’s liver to become so dry that “when it is subjected to even the slightest friction its substance falls away in tiny flakes like sawdust and leaves behind the veins and arteries.” It also led to his flesh becoming “the color of wood or dried chestnut, because the skin is almost completely deprived of sustenance.” The noted medical historian and cardiologist Kenneth Keele called Leonardo’s analysis “the first description of arteriosclerosis as a function of time.”4





DISSECTIONS


By Leonardo’s day, the Church no longer completely prohibited dissections, although its attitude was murky and depended on local authorities. In Florence and Milan, though not in Rome, the practice had become common as Renaissance science progressed. The Florentine physician Antonio Benivieni, born nine years before Leonardo, was a pioneer of autopsies, performing more than 150 of them. Leonardo, who was not strongly religious, pushed back on the fundamentalists who considered dissection heretical. He believed it was a way to appreciate God’s handiwork. “You should not be distressed that your discoveries come through another’s death; rather you should rejoice that our Creator has provided an instrument of such excellence,” he wrote on a tinted blue notebook page on which he drew the muscles and bones of the neck.5

Traditional anatomy instructors would stand at a lectern and read aloud from their texts while an assistant dissected a corpse and held up its components for students to view. Leonardo insisted that his drawings were even better than watching a live dissection: “You who say it is better to watch an anatomist at work than to see these drawings would be right, if it were possible to see all those things which are shown in these drawings.” The reason it was possible to see more in the drawings, he said, was because they had been based on multiple dissections and also showed views from multiple angles. “I have dissected more than ten human bodies,” he wrote, and after making that statement he would dissect even more, working on each as long as possible, until they decomposed so badly he was forced to move on. “As one body did not last so long, it was necessary to proceed by stages with as many bodies as would render my knowledge complete.” He then performed even more dissections so that he could ascertain the variances between humans.6

When Leonardo began this second round of anatomy studies in 1508, he made a to-do list that surely must rank as one of the quirkiest and most enchanting such lists in the history of intellectual inquiry.7 On one side of the page are a few sketches of dissecting instruments and, on the other side, some small drawings of veins and nerves found in the brain of the centenarian, with writing crammed all around them. “Have Avicenna’s book on useful inventions translated,” he wrote, referring to a book by the eleventh-century Persian polymath. Having drawn various surgical tools, he jotted down some of the equipment he needed: “Spectacles with case, firestick, fork, curved knife, charcoal, boards, sheets of paper, white chalk, wax, forceps, pane of glass, fine-tooth bone saw, scalpel, inkhorn, pen-knife, and get hold of a skull.”

Then comes my favorite item on any Leonardo list: “Describe the tongue of the woodpecker.” This is not just a random entry. He mentioned the woodpecker’s tongue again on a later page, where he described and drew the human tongue. “Make the motions of the woodpecker,” he wrote. When I first saw his entry about the woodpecker, I regarded it, as most scholars have, as an entertaining oddity—an amuse-bouche, so to speak—evidence of the eccentric nature of Leonardo’s relentless curiosity. That it indeed is. But there is more, as I discovered after pushing myself to be more like Leonardo and drill down into random curiosities. Leonardo, I realized, had become fascinated by the muscles of the tongue. All of the other muscles he studied acted by pulling rather than pushing a body part, but the tongue seemed to be an exception. This was true in humans and in other animals. The most notable example is the tongue of the woodpecker. Nobody had drawn or fully written about it before, but Leonardo with his acute ability to observe objects in motion knew that there was something to be learned from it.8

On the same list, Leonardo instructed himself to describe “the jaw of the crocodile.” Once again, if we follow his curiosity, rather than merely be amused by it, we can see that he was on to an important topic. A crocodile, unlike any mammal, has a second jaw joint, which spreads out the force when it snaps shut its mouth. That gives the crocodile the most forceful bite of any animal. It can exert 3,700 pounds per square inch of force, which is more than thirty times that of a human bite.

Leonardo engaged in dissections before proper fixatives and preservatives had been invented, so alongside his to-do list he issued a warning directed at those who would undertake such a task. It doubles as a subtle boast about the talents—a strong stomach, good drawing skills, knowledge of perspective, an understanding of the math underlying mechanics, along with an obsessive curiosity—that he uniquely brought to his work as an anatomist:

You will perhaps be deterred by your stomach; and if this does not deter you, you may be deterred by the fear of living through the night hours in the company of quartered and flayed corpses, fearful to behold. And if this does not deter you, perhaps you will lack the good draftsmanship that such a depiction requires; and even if you have skill in drawing, it may not be accompanied by a knowledge of perspective; and if it were so accompanied, you may lack the methods of geometrical demonstration and of calculating the forces and strengths of the muscles; or perhaps you will lack patience so that you will not be diligent.9

There is an echo in this passage of Leonardo’s memory of coming across the mouth of a cave as a young man. As in that tale, he had to overcome his fear to go into a dark and fearful space. Although at times he was irresolute and willing to abandon tasks, his powerful curiosity tended to overcome any hesitations when it came to exploring nature’s wonders.

Leonardo’s anatomy studies were another example of the influence of the printing press, which was spawning publishing houses throughout Italy. By then Leonardo owned 116 books, including Johannes de Ketham’s Fasciculus Medicinae, published in Venice in 1498; Bartolomeo Montagnana’s Tractatus de Urinarum, published in Padua in 1487; and Anatomice, by Leonardo’s contemporary Alessandro Benedetti, printed in Venice in 1502. He had an edition of the standard dissection guide by the Bologna physician Mondino de Luzzi, which had been written in about 1316 and was printed in Italian in 1493. He used Mondino’s book as a manual for his early dissections, and he even replicated one of Mondino’s mistakes in identifying some of the muscles of the abdomen.10

But, true to form, Leonardo preferred learning from experiment rather than from established authority. His most important hands-on inquiries came during the winter of 1510–11, when he collaborated with Marcantonio della Torre, a twenty-nine-year-old anatomy professor at the University of Pavia. “Each helped and was helped by the other,” Vasari wrote of their relationship. The young professor provided the human cadavers—probably twenty of them were dissected that winter—and lectured while his students did the actual cutting and Leonardo made notes and drawings.11

During this period of intense anatomical study, Leonardo made 240 drawings and wrote at least thirteen thousand words of text, illustrating and describing every bone, muscle group, and major organ in the human body for what would have been, if it had been published, his most historic scientific triumph. On an elegant drawing showing a man’s muscular calf and the tendons of his foot, modeled and shaded with his signature curved cross-hatchings, Leonardo wrote, “This winter of 1510 I believe I will finish all this anatomy.”12

It was not to be. Marcantonio died in 1511 of the plague that was devastating Italy that year. It is enticing to imagine what he and Leonardo could have accomplished. One of the things that could have most benefited Leonardo in his career was a partner who would help him follow through and publish his brilliant work. Together he and Marcantonio could have produced a groundbreaking illustrated treatise on anatomy that would have transformed a field still dominated by scholars who mainly regurgitated the notions of the second-century Greek physician Galen. Instead, Leonardo’s anatomy studies became another example of how he was disadvantaged by having few rigorous and disciplined collaborators along the lines of Luca Pacioli, whose text on geometric proportions Leonardo had illustrated. With Marcantonio dead, Leonardo retreated to the country villa of Francesco Melzi’s family to ride out the plague.





ANALOGIES


In most of his studies of nature, Leonardo theorized by making analogies. His quest for knowledge across all the disciplines of arts and sciences helped him see patterns. Occasionally this mode of thinking misled him, and it sometimes substituted for reaching more profound scientific theories. But this cross-disciplinary thinking and pattern-seeking was his hallmark as the quintessential Renaissance Man, and it made him a pioneer of scientific humanism.

For example, when he looked at the veins and arteries he was dissecting, he compared their flow and branching to that of the human digestive, urinary, and respiratory systems. He made analogies with the flows of rivers, the movements of air, and the branching of plants. On one of his detailed depictions of the human blood circulation system, based on his dissection of the centenarian in 1508, he made a large drawing of the great vessels of the heart, with the aorta and vena cava connecting to increasingly smaller offshoots of veins and arteries and capillaries (fig. 103). Then he moved to his left to make a smaller drawing of a seed, which he labeled “nut,” with its roots stretching into the ground and its branches stretching upward. “The heart is the nut which generates the tree of the veins,” he wrote on the page.13

Fig. 103. The heart and arteries juxtaposed with a sprouting seed.



Another analogy Leonardo made was between the human body and machines. He compared the movement of muscles and the body to the mechanical rules he had learned from his engineering studies. As he had done with machines, he illustrated body parts using exploded views, multiple angles, and stacked-up layers (fig. 104). He studied the movements of various muscles and bones, as if they operated like strings and levers, and layered the muscles on top of the bones to show the mechanics of each joint. “Muscles always arise and end in bones adjoining one another,” he explained. “They never arise and end on one and the same bone because nothing would be able to move.” It all added up to an ingenious mechanism of moving parts: “The joints between bones obey the tendon, and the tendon obeys the muscle, and the muscle the nerve.”14

Fig. 104. Multiple layers of bone and muscle.



His comparisons between man-made machinery and the handiwork of nature produced in him a deep reverence for the latter. “Though human ingenuity may make various inventions,” he wrote, “it will never devise an invention more beautiful, more simple, more direct than does Nature; because in her inventions nothing is lacking and nothing is superfluous.”15

Fig. 105. Method for making a wax cast of the brain.



Just as Leonardo’s anatomy informed his art, so was the reverse true: his artistic, sculpting, drawing, and engineering skills crossed disciplines and aided his anatomical studies. In a groundbreaking experiment, he used sculpture and casting techniques to map the hollow cavities, known as cerebral ventricles, in the human brain (fig. 105). From his studies of ways to cast the great horse monument in Milan, Leonardo knew how to inject molten wax into the brain and provide ventilation holes for the air and fluids in the cavities to escape. “Make two vent-holes in the horns of the greater ventricles, and insert melted wax with a syringe, making a hole in the ventricle of memory; and through such a hole fill the three ventricles of the brain. Then when the wax has set, take apart the brain, and you will see the shape of the ventricles exactly.” A small sketch on the bottom-right of the page illustrates the technique.16

Leonardo did the experiment using the brain of a cow, since it was easier to get than a human brain. But from his readings and earlier human dissections, he knew how to modify his findings and apply them to a human brain, which he did with impressive accuracy on a set of drawings that display it in an exploded view (fig. 106).17 His only mistakes were that the middle ventricle is slightly enlarged because of the pressure of the wax, and the ends of the lateral ventricles were not completely filled by the wax. Otherwise, the results were extraordinary. Leonardo had for the first time in history injected a molding material into a human cavity. It was a technique that would not be replicated until the studies by the Dutch anatomist Frederik Ruysch more than two centuries later. Along with his discoveries about heart valves, it was Leonardo’s most important anatomical breakthrough, and it happened because he was a sculptor as well as a scientist.

Fig. 106. Nerves and ventricles of the brain.





MUSCLES AND BONES


Leonardo’s methods as well as his art are displayed on a page on which he depicted the muscles of the shoulder (fig. 107). “Before you form the muscles,” he wrote, “make in their place threads that should demonstrate their positions.” He did just that in the schematic sketch of threads in the shoulder on the top right of the page (which is the first drawing he made on the page since in his left-handed fashion he starts on the right). Directly to the left and below his sketch of threads we can see the centenarian in two different poses, his skin peeled off to show the muscles of his right shoulder. Leonardo then moved to the top left of the page, where he correctly drew and labeled with letters the pectoralis major, latissimus dorsi, rhomboid, and other muscles.18

Leonardo began his studies of human muscles, as with most of his scientific work, to serve his art, but he was soon pursuing them out of pure curiosity. In the former category is a drawing he made that shows the muscles of a right arm in four different views. Understanding how they change shape as they move, he wrote, “will be an advantage for artists who have to exaggerate the muscles that cause the movements of limbs more than the ones that are not employed in such movement.”19 Another anatomy drawing that appears to be related to his Battle of Anghiari cartoon is a forceful-looking frontal view of a man’s leg muscles, artistically modeled and shaded with fine cross-hatch strokes (fig. 108). In a note titled “Nature of Muscles,” he described the way body fat is distributed in muscular men: “A man will be fatter or leaner in proportion to the greater or lesser lengths of the tendons of muscles.”20

Fig. 107. Muscles of the shoulder.



Fig. 108. Muscles of the leg.



By the time Leonardo got around to studying and drawing the human spine, he had been captivated by curiosity and the joy of research rather than merely the pursuit of practical painting knowledge. His page showing the spine accurately rendered and notated from a variety of angles is a masterpiece of both anatomy and draftsmanship (fig. 109). Through the use of light and shadows, he was able to make each of the vertebrae seem three-dimensional, and he conveyed a sense of twisting motion in the curved spine at the top middle of the page. Complexity is magically transformed into an elegance that is unrivaled by any anatomical drawings of his time—or ours.

His precise renderings of the five sets of vertebrae are marked with letters, listed in a table, and explained in his notes. This led him to ask questions about details that most people would not have noticed. “Explain why nature has varied the five superior vertebrae of the neck at their extremities,” he instructed himself.

Fig. 109. The spine, with exploded view.



The last drawing he made on this sheet, at the bottom left of the page, is one of his exploded views, of the kind he made of machines, showing the first three cervical vertebrae, with their interlocking mechanisms rendered masterfully. It was important, he said, to depict the spine “separate and then joined together,” with views from the front, back, side, above, and below. At the bottom of the page, when he had finished, he could not refrain from a bit of boasting about his method, which he declared would produce “knowledge that neither ancient writers nor the moderns would ever have been able to give without an immense, tiresome, and confused amount of writing and time.”21





LIPS AND SMILE


Leonardo was especially interested in how the human brain and nervous system translate emotions into movements of the body. On one drawing, he showed the spinal cord sawed in half and he delineated all the nerves that ran down to it from the brain. “The spinal cord is the source of the nerves that gives voluntary movement to the limbs,” he explained.22

Of all these nerves and related muscles, the ones controlling the lips were the most important to Leonardo. Dissecting them was exceedingly difficult, because lip muscles are small and plentiful and originate deep in the skin. “The muscles which move the lips are more numerous in man than in any other animal,” he wrote. “One will always find as many muscles as there are positions of the lips and many more that serve to undo these positions.” Despite these difficulties, he depicted the facial muscles and nerves with remarkable accuracy.

On one delightfully crammed anatomical sheet (fig. 110), Leonardo drew the muscles of two dissected arms and hands, and he placed between them two partially dissected faces in profile. The faces show the muscles and nerves that control the lips and other elements of expression. In the one on the left, Leonardo has removed part of the jawbone to expose the buccinator muscle, which pulls back the angle of the mouth and flattens the cheek as a smile begins to form. Here we can see, exposed with scalpel cuts and then pen strokes, the actual mechanisms that transmit emotions into facial expressions. He wrote next to one of the faces, “Represent all the causes of motion possessed by the skin, flesh and muscles of the face and see if these muscles receive their motion from nerves which come from the brain or not.”

Fig. 110. Dissections of arms and face.



He labeled one of the muscles in the left-hand drawing “H” and called it “the muscle of anger.” Another is labeled “P” and designated as the muscle of sadness or pain. He showed how these muscles not only move the lips but also serve to move the eyebrows downward and together, causing wrinkles.

On this page of dissected faces and lips, we can also see Leonardo pursuing the comparative anatomy he needed for his Battle of Anghiari drawings, in which the anger on the faces of the humans is matched by that on the faces of the horses. After his note about representing the causes of motion of the human face, he added, “And do this first for the horse that has large muscles. Notice whether the muscle that raises the nostrils of the horse is the same as that which lies here in man.”23 So here is another secret to Leonardo’s unique ability to paint a facial expression: he is probably the only artist in history ever to dissect with his own hands the face of a human and that of a horse to see if the muscles that move human lips are the same ones that can raise the nostrils of the nose.

Finally, as he got to the bottom of the crammed page, Leonardo’s mind began to wander, to our delight. He paused to draw his favorite doodle: that of a curly haired man with nutcracker nose and chin. This one seems to hover between being a portrait of a younger version of himself and an older version of Salai. The man’s lips are set in a way that displays resolve but also a touch of melancholy.

After his excursion into comparative anatomy, Leonardo proceeded to delve deeper into the mechanisms of humans as they smile or grimace (fig. 111). He focused on the role of various nerves in sending signals to the muscles, and he asked a question that was central to his art: Which of these are cranial nerves originating in the brain, and which are spinal nerves?

His notes begin as if he were focused on a battle scene filled with angry expressions: “Make the nostrils drawn up, causing furrows in the side of the nose, and the lips arched to disclose the upper teeth, with the teeth parted in order to shriek lamentations.” But he then began to explore other expressions. On the top left are lips tightly pursed, underneath which he wrote, “The maximum shortening of the mouth is equal to half its maximum extension, and it is equal to the greatest width of the nostrils of the nose and to the interval between the ducts of the eye.” He tested on himself and on the cadaver how each muscle of the cheek could move the lips, and how the muscle of the lips can also pull the lateral muscles of the wall of the cheek. “The muscle shortening the lips is the same muscle forming the lower lip itself. Other muscles are those which bring the lips to a point, others which spread them, others which curl them back, others which straighten them out, others which twist them transversely, and others which return them to their first position.” On the top right of the page are front and profile drawings of retracted lips with the skin still on; at the bottom of the page, he made the drawings after removing the facial skin, showing the muscles that pull the lips. These are the first known examples of the scientific anatomy of the human smile.24

Fig. 111. Nerves and muscles of the mouth.



Floating above the grotesque grimaces on the top of the page is a faint sketch of a simple set of lips drawn in a way that is artistic rather than anatomical. The lips peek out of the page directly at us with just a hint—flickering and haunting and alluring—of a mysterious smile. At the time, Leonardo was working on the Mona Lisa.





THE HEART


On one of Leonardo’s pages of drawings of the human heart (fig. 112), done in ink on blue paper, is a reminder of the humanity, and even humanness, that suffuse his anatomical studies.25 At the top is a drawing of the heart’s papillary muscle and a description of how it shortens and elongates when the heart beats. Then, as if he were being too clinical, he let his mind wander and pen begin to doodle. And there, in loving profile, is a drawing of Salai, his beautiful curls flowing down his long neck, his signature receding chin and fleshy throat softly modeled with Leonardo’s left-handed hatching. In his chest is a section of a heart, with its muscles sketched in. An analysis of the drawing shows that the heart was sketched first. It seems as if Leonardo drew it, then sketched Salai around it.

Leonardo’s studies of the human heart, conducted as part of his overall anatomical and dissection work, were the most sustained and successful of his scientific endeavors.26 Informed by his love of hydraulic engineering and his fascination with the flow of liquids, he made discoveries that were not fully appreciated for centuries.

In the early 1500s the European understanding of the heart was not all that different from that described in the second century AD by Galen, whose work was revived during the Renaissance. Galen believed that the heart was not merely a muscle but was made of a special substance that gave it a vital force. Blood was made in the liver, he taught, and distributed through the veins. Vital spirits were produced by the heart and distributed through arteries, which Galen and his successors considered a separate system. Neither the blood nor vital spirits circulated, he thought; instead, they pulsed back and forth in the veins and arteries.

Fig. 112. The heart with Salai.



Leonardo was among the first to fully appreciate that the heart, not the liver, was the center of the blood system. “All the veins and arteries arise from the heart,” he wrote on the page that includes the drawings comparing the branches and roots of a seed with the veins and arteries emanating from the heart. He proved this by showing, in both words and a detailed drawing, “that the largest veins and arteries are found where they join with the heart, and the further they are removed from the heart, the finer they become, dividing into very small branches.” He became the first to analyze how the size of the branches diminish with each split, and he traced them down to tiny capillaries that were almost invisible. To those who would respond that the veins are rooted in the liver the way a plant is rooted in the soil, he pointed out that a plant’s roots and branches emanate from a central seed, which is analogous to the heart.27

Leonardo was also able to show, contrary to Galen, that the heart is simply a muscle rather than some form of special vital tissue. Like all muscles, the heart has its own blood supply and nerves. “It is nourished by an artery and veins, as are other muscles,” he found.28

He also corrected the Galenic belief that the heart has only two ventricles. His dissections showed that there are two upper and two lower ventricles. These must have distinct functions, he argued, because they were separated by valves and membranes. “If they were one and the same, there would be no need for the valves that separate them.” In order to figure out how the ventricles work, Leonardo opened up a pig whose heart was still beating. The upper and lower ventricles open at different times, he discovered. “The upper ventricles of the heart are different in their functions and nature from those below, and they are separated by gristle and various substances.”29

Leonardo did accept Galen’s incorrect theory that blood is warm because it is heated by the heart, and he wrestled with many theories of how this happened. He finally settled on the supposition that the heat is generated by the friction of the moving heart and the blood rubbing against the heart walls. “The whirling round of the blood in different eddies, and the friction it makes with the walls, and the percussions in the recesses, are the cause of the heating of the blood,” he concluded. In order to test his theory by analogy, as he often did, he considered whether milk became heated when it was churned. “Observe whether the revolution of milk when butter is made heats it” he put on his to-do list.30





THE AORTIC VALVE


Leonardo’s greatest achievement in his heart studies, and indeed in all of his anatomical work, was his discovery of the way the aortic valve works, a triumph that was confirmed only in modern times. It was birthed by his understanding, indeed love, of spiral flows. For his entire career, Leonardo was fascinated by the swirls of water eddies, wind currents, and hair curls cascading down a neck. He applied this knowledge to determining how the spiral flow of blood through a part of the aorta known as the sinus of Valsalva creates eddies and swirls that serve to close the valve of a beating heart. His analysis filled six pages, crammed with twenty drawings and hundreds of words of notations.31

On top of one of the first of these pages he wrote a dictum, derived from the maxim Plato inscribed over the door of his Academy: “Let no one who is not a mathematician read my work.”32 This did not mean that his study of the heart’s blood flow would involve rigorous equations; his study of the math describing swirls and curls had not gone beyond a bit of dabbling with the Fibonacci sequence of numbers. Instead, the injunction was an expression of his belief that nature’s actions obey physical laws and math-like certainties.

His discoveries about the heart valve derived from the intense inquiries into fluid dynamics he was doing around 1510, including an analysis of how water flowing from pipes into a tank creates eddies. One phenomenon that interested him was fluid drag. When a current flows through a pipe or a channel or a river, he discovered, the water that is closest to the sides flows slower than the water in the middle. This is because the water on the sides rubs up against the wall of the pipe or the banks of the river, and the friction slows it down. The layer of water right next to this will also slow down a little bit; the water flowing at the center of the pipe or river will be slowed the least. When the water flows out of the pipe into a tank, or out of the river into a pool, the difference in speed between the fast central flow and the slower side flow causes whirlpools and eddies. “Of the water that pours out of a horizontal pipe, the part that originates nearer the center of the mouth will go further away from the mouth of the pipe,” he wrote. He also described how vortexes and eddies are formed by fluids that flow past curved surfaces or in a channel that gets wider. He applied this to his study of the erosion of riverbanks, his depiction in his art of flowing water, and his inquiries into how blood is pumped out of the heart.33

Specifically, Leonardo focused on the blood that was pumped upward from the heart through a triangle-shaped opening into the root of the aorta, which is the large vessel that carries blood from the heart to the body. “The middle of the blood that spouts up through the triangle acquires much more height than that which rises up along the sides,” he declared. He went on to describe how that causes it to form spiraling eddies as it pours into the blood that is already in the widened sections of the aorta. These sections are now known as the sinuses of Valsalva, after the Italian anatomist Antonio Valsalva, who wrote about them in the early 1700s. By right they should be called the sinuses of Leonardo, and they probably would have been if Leonardo had published the discoveries he had made about them two centuries before Valsalva.34

This swirling action of the blood after it is pumped into the aorta causes the leaflets of the triangular valves between the heart and the aorta to spread out and then cover the opening. “The revolving blood beats against the sides of the three valves and closes them so that the blood cannot descend.” It was like wind swirls spreading out the corners of a triangular sail, an analogy Leonardo employed in explaining his discovery. On a drawing that shows how the eddies of blood pull open the cusps of the valve, he wrote, “Give names to the cords that open and shut the two sails.”

The common view, which was held by most heart specialists until the 1960s, was that the valve is pushed shut from above once enough blood has rushed into the aorta and begun to back up. Most other kinds of valve work that way, swinging shut when the flow begins to reverse. For more than four centuries, heart researchers paid little attention to Leonardo’s argument that the valve would not be properly closed by pressure from above: “The blood which turns back when the heart reopens is not that which closes the valves of the heart. This would be impossible, because if the blood beats against the valves of the heart while they are wrinkled and folded, the blood that presses from above would press down and crumple the membrane.” On the top of the last of the six pages, he sketched how the crumpled valve would scrunch up if a backflow of blood pressured it from above (fig. 113).35

Fig. 113. The aortic valve.



Leonardo had developed his hypothesis through analogy: using what he knew about eddies of water and air, he surmised how the flood would spiral into the aorta. But then he devised an ingenious way to test his idea. On the top of this crammed notebook page, he described and drew a way to make a glass model of the heart. When filled with water, it would allow him to observe the way blood would swirl as it passed into the aorta. He used a bull’s heart as a model, filling it with wax using the sculptor’s technique he had used in creating a model of the brain. When the wax hardened, he made a mold to build a glass model of the heart chamber, valve, and aorta. By sprinkling in grass seeds, he made the flow of water more visible. “Make this test in the glass and put water and panic-grass seed inside it,” he directed.36

It took 450 years for anatomists to realize that Leonardo was correct. In the 1960s a team of medical researchers led by Brian Bellhouse at Oxford used dyes and radiography methods to observe blood flows. As Leonardo had done, they used a transparent model of the aorta filled with water to observe the swirls and flow. The experiments showed that the valve required “a fluid dynamic control mechanism which positions the cusps away from the wall of the aorta, so that the slightest reversed flow will close the valve.” That mechanism, they realized, was the vortex or swirling flow of blood that Leonardo had discovered in the aorta root. “The vortices produce a thrust on both the cusp and the sinus wall, and the closure of the cusps is thus steady and synchronized,” they wrote. “Leonardo da Vinci correctly predicted the formation of vortices between the cusp and its sinus and appreciated that these would help close the valve.” The surgeon Sherwin Nuland declared, “Of all the amazements that Leonardo left for the ages, this one would seem to be the most extraordinary.”

In 1991 Francis Robicsek of the Carolina Heart Institute showed how closely the Bellhouse experiments resembled the ones that Leonardo described in his notebooks. And in 2014 another Oxford team was able to study blood flow in a living human to prove conclusively that Leonardo was right. To do so they used magnetic resonance techniques to view in real time the complex blood flow patterns in the aortic root of a living person. “We confirm in a human in vivo that Leonardo’s prediction of systolic flow vortices was accurate and that he provided a strikingly precise depiction of these vortices in proportion to the aortic root,” they concluded.37

Leonardo’s breakthroughs on heart valves were followed, however, by a failure: not discovering that the blood in the body circulates. His understanding of one-way valves should have made him realize the flaw in the Galenic theory, universally accepted during his time, that the blood is pulsed back and forth by the heart, moving to-and-fro. But Leonardo, somewhat unusually, was blinded by book learning. The “unlettered” man who disdained those who relied on received wisdom and vowed to make experiment his mistress failed to do so in this case. His genius and creativity had always come from proceeding without preconceptions. His study of blood flow, however, was one of the rare cases where he had acquired enough textbooks and expert tutors that he failed to think differently. A full explanation of blood circulation in the human body would have to wait for William Harvey a century later.





THE FETUS


Leonardo’s anatomical studies culminated with his depiction of the beginning of life. On a cluttered notebook page (fig. 114), he carefully rendered in ink over subtle red chalk his iconic image of a fetus in the womb.38 The drawing rivals Vitruvian Man as an emblem of Leonardo’s combination of art and science. It is good as an anatomical study, but purely divine, almost literally so, as a work of art. Drawn with meticulous curved hatchings that are designed to dazzle our eyes as much as inform our minds, it captures the human condition with a spiritual beauty that is at once unnerving and ennobling. We can see ourselves embodied in the wonder of creation: innocent, miraculous, mysterious. Though the drawing is usually parsed and analyzed as a work of anatomy, the Guardian art critic Jonathan Jones got closer to its essence when he wrote, “It is for me the most beautiful work of art in the world.”39

Fig. 114. Fetus in the womb.



Leonardo did not have a female cadaver to dissect, so some of the elements are drawn from a cow dissection. The womb is therefore spherical, unlike in a human. But he did improve on the conventional wisdom of his era. He correctly drew the uterus with one chamber, in contrast to contemporary belief that it had multiple chambers. His depictions of the uterine artery, vascular system of the vagina, and blood vessels in the umbilical cord are also groundbreaking.

As usual, Leonardo saw patterns across disciplines and used analogies as a method of inquiry. At the time of his fetus drawing, he had reengaged in his study of plants. Just as he had made an analogy between the branching of plants and rivers and blood vessels, so he noticed the similarities between the way plant seeds and human embryos develop. Plants have a stalk, known as a funiculus, that connects the seed to the wall of its ovule until the seed becomes ripe, and Leonardo realized that it served the same purpose as an umbilical cord. “All seeds have an umbilical cord, which is broken when the seed is ripe,” he wrote on one of his anatomical drawings of a human fetus.40

Leonardo was aware that his fetus drawing had a spiritual quality that transcended his other anatomical studies. A few years later, he returned to the sketch to write a paragraph at the bottom of the page. It is more essay than dissection notes. He began scientifically by arguing that the embryo does not breathe in the womb because it is surrounded by fluids. “If it breathed it would drown,” he explained, “and breathing is not necessary because it is nourished by the life and food of the mother.” Then he added some thoughts that the Church, which believed that individual human life begins at conception, would have considered heretical. The embryo is still as much a part of the mother as her hands and feet are. “One and the same soul governs these two bodies,” he added, “and one and the same soul nourishes both.”

Leonardo’s rejection of Church teachings on the soul was done without drama or angst. He was naturally comfortable with scientific humanism and tended to look at facts. He believed in the glorious and awe-inspiring nature of creation, but for him these were things to be studied and appreciated through science and art, not through the dogmas handed down by the Church.





LOST IMPACT


Leonardo dedicated himself to his anatomy studies with a persistence and diligence that were often lacking in his other endeavors. During his frenzied years of work from 1508 to 1513, he seemed never to tire of it and kept digging deeper, even though it meant nights spent amid cadavers and the stench of decaying organs.

He was mainly motivated by his own curiosity. He may have considered, as well, that he was making a contribution to public knowledge, but here it gets murky. He wrote that he intended his findings to be published, but when it came to editing and organizing his notes he was once again dilatory rather than diligent. He was more interested in pursuing knowledge than in publishing it. And even though he was collegial in his life and work, he made little effort to share his findings.

This is true for all of his studies, not just his work on anatomy. The trove of treatises that he left unpublished testifies to the unusual nature of what motivated him. He wanted to accumulate knowledge for its own sake, and for his own personal joy, rather than out of a desire to make a public name for himself as a scholar or to be part of the progress of history. Some have even said that he wrote in mirror script partly to guard his discoveries from prying eyes; I do not think that is true, but it is indisputable that his passion for gathering knowledge was not matched by one for sharing it widely. As the Leonardo scholar Charles Hope has pointed out, “He had no real understanding of the way in which the growth of knowledge was a cumulative and collaborative process.”41 Although he would occasionally let visitors glimpse his work, he did not seem to realize or care that the importance of research comes from its dissemination.

Years later, when he was living in France in 1517, a visitor reported that Leonardo had dissected more than thirty bodies and “written a treatise on anatomy, showing the limbs, muscles, nerves, veins, joints, intestines, and everything that can be explained in the body of men and women, in a way that has never been done by anyone before.” He added that Leonardo had “also written on the nature of water, and has filled an infinite number of volumes with treatises on machines and other subjects, all written in the vulgar tongue, which, when published, will be of the greatest profit and delight.”42 But when he died, Leonardo would leave to Melzi only piles of unedited notebook pages and drawings.

Modern anatomy instead began twenty-five years after Leonardo’s death, when Andreas Vesalius published his epochal and beautifully produced On the Fabric of the Human Body. That was the book that Leonardo—perhaps in conjunction with Marcantonio della Torre, had he not died young from the plague—could have preceded and surpassed. Instead, Leonardo’s anatomical work had minimal influence. Over the years, and even centuries, his discoveries had to be rediscovered by others. The fact that he didn’t publish served to diminish his impact on the history of science. But it did not diminish his genius.





