CHAPTER 8




* * *





Vitruvian Man



A TIBURIO FOR MILAN’S CATHEDRAL


When Milan’s authorities in 1487 were seeking ideas for building a lantern tower, known as a tiburio, atop their cathedral, Leonardo seized the opportunity to establish his credentials as an architect. That year he had completed his plans for an ideal city, but they had engendered little interest. The competition to design the tiburio was a chance to show that he could do something more practical.

Milan’s cathedral (fig. 36) was a century old, but it still did not have the traditional tiburio on the roof at the crossing of the nave and transept. The challenge, which had defeated a few previous architects, was to conform with the building’s Gothic style and overcome the structural weakness of its crossing area. At least nine architects entered the 1487 competition, approaching the task in a somewhat collaborative fashion, sharing ideas.1

Fig. 36. Milan Cathedral, with tiburio.



The Italian Renaissance was producing artist-engineer-architects who straddled disciplines, in the tradition of Brunelleschi and Alberti, and the tiburio project gave Leonardo the opportunity to work with two of the best: Donato Bramante and Francesco di Giorgio. They became his close friends, and their collaboration produced some interesting church designs. Far more important, it also led to a set of drawings, based on the writings of an ancient Roman architect, that sought to harmonize the proportions of a human to that of a church, an effort that would culminate with an iconic drawing by Leonardo that came to symbolize the harmonious relationship between man and the universe.

Bramante served as the initial expert judging the tiburio submissions. Eight years older than Leonardo, he was a farmer’s son from near Urbino with grand ambitions and appetites. He moved to Milan in the early 1470s to make a name for himself, and he carved out roles that ranged from entertainer to engineer. Like Leonardo, he began his work at the Sforza court by being an impresario of pageants and performances. He also wrote witty verses, offered up clever riddles, and occasionally accompanied his performances by playing a lyre or lute.

Some of Leonardo’s allegorical tales and prophecies were complements to Bramante’s, and by the late 1480s they were working together on fantasias performed for special occasions and other effusions of the Sforza entertainment industry. Both men displayed dazzling brilliance and effortless charm, despite which they became close friends. In his notebooks Leonardo affectionately called the architect “Donnino,” and Bramante dedicated a book of poems about Roman antiquities to Leonardo, calling him a “cordial, dear, and delightful associate.”2

A few years after he and Leonardo became friends,3 Bramante painted a fresco that featured two ancient philosophers, Heraclitus and Democritus (fig. 37). Democritus, known to be amused by the human condition, is laughing, while Heraclitus is crying. Round-faced and balding, the former appears to be a self-portrait of Bramante, while the portrait of Heraclitus seems to be based on Leonardo. He has a profusion of flowing, tightly curled hair, rose-colored tunic, prominent eyebrows and chin, and a manuscript book in front of him with the characters in right-to-left mirror script. Thus we can imagine how Leonardo, still clean-shaven, looked in his prime.

Bramante moved on from the role of impresario to being on retainer as an artist-engineer-architect of the Sforza court, thus shaping the role and paving the way for Leonardo. In the mid-1480s, when he and Leonardo were working together, Bramante displayed his combination of art and architecture talents by designing a fake apse, or choir area, behind the altar of Milan’s Church of Santa Maria presso San Satiro. Because space was cramped, there was no room for a full apse. Using the knowledge of perspective that was spreading among Renaissance painters, Bramante conjured up a trompe l’œil, a painted optical illusion that made it seem as if the space had more depth.

Fig. 37. Bramante’s Heraclitus and Democritus, Leonardo on the left.



Within a few years, he and Leonardo would together work on a similar feat of engineering and perspective, when Ludovico Sforza commissioned Bramante to rework the convent of Santa Maria delle Grazie by adding a new dining hall, and Leonardo was hired to paint on its wall a depiction of the Last Supper. Both Bramante and Leonardo favored church designs that were based on strict symmetry. This led them to prefer central temple-like plans that featured overlapping squares, circles, and other regular geometric shapes, as can be seen in many of Leonardo’s church sketches (fig. 38).

Fig. 38. Church drawings.



Bramante presented his written opinion on the tiburio design ideas in September 1487. One issue was whether the tower should have four sides, which would fit more securely on the support beams of the roof, or eight sides. “I maintain that the square is far stronger and better than the octagon, because it matches the rest of the building far better,” he concluded.

Leonardo received six payments in July through September 1487 for his work on the project, which probably included consulting with Bramante as he wrote his opinion. In one of his presentations, Leonardo made a philosophical pitch that drew on the analogy, of which he was so fond, between human bodies and buildings. “Medicines, when properly used, restore health to invalids, and a doctor will make the right use of them if he understands the nature of man,” he wrote. “This too is what the sick cathedral needs—it needs a doctor-architect, who understands the nature of the building and the laws on which correct construction is based.”4

He filled pages of his notebooks with drawings and descriptions of what caused structural weaknesses in buildings, and he was the first to do a systematic study on the origins of fissures in walls. “The cracks that are vertical are caused by the joining of new walls with old ones,” he wrote, “for the indentations cannot bear the great weight of the wall added on to them, so it is inevitable that they should break.”5

To shore up the unsteady parts of the Milan Cathedral, Leonardo devised a system of buttresses to stabilize the area around his proposed tower and, always a believer in experiment, designed a simple test to show how they would work:

An Experiment to show that a weight placed on an arch does not discharge itself entirely on its columns; on the contrary, the greater the weight placed on the arches, the less the arch transmits the weight to the columns: Let a man be placed on a weighing-device in the middle of a well-shaft, then have him push out his hands and feet against the walls of the well. You will find that he weighs much less on the scales. If you put weights on his shoulders you will see for yourselves that the more weight you put on him, the greater will be the force with which he spreads his arms and legs and presses against the wall, and the less will be his weight on the scales.6

With the help of a carpenter’s assistant he hired, Leonardo made a wooden model of his design for the tiburio, for which he received a series of payments early in 1488. He did not try to have his tiburio blend in with the cathedral’s Gothic design and ornate exterior. Instead, he displayed his inbred fondness for Florence’s Duomo; his many sketches for a Tuscan-style cupola seem more inspired by Brunelleschi’s dome than the Gothic flying buttresses of Milan’s cathedral. His most ingenious proposal was to create a double-shelled dome, like Brunelleschi’s. It would be four-sided on the outside, as Bramante had recommended, but on the inside it would be octagonal.7





FRANCESCO DI GIORGIO IS CALLED IN


After receiving Bramante’s opinion along with proposals from Leonardo and other architects, the Milanese authorities seemed baffled about what to do, so in April 1490 they convened a meeting of all who had been involved. The result was to call in yet another expert, Francesco di Giorgio from Siena.8

Thirteen years older than Leonardo, he was another exemplar of an artisan who combined art, engineering, and architecture. He had begun as a painter, moved as a young man to Urbino to work as an architect, returned to Siena to run the underground aqueduct system, and was a sculptor in his spare time. He was also interested in military weaponry and fortifications. In other words, he was the Leonardo of Siena.

Like Leonardo, Francesco kept pocket-size notebooks of design ideas, and in 1475 he began collecting them for a treatise on architecture intended as a successor to the one by Alberti. Written in unpolished Italian rather than Latin, Francesco’s was designed as a manual for builders rather than a scholarly work. He tried to ground design in math as well as in art. The range of his ideas was similar to those in Leonardo’s notebooks. Spilling across its pages were drawings and discussions of machinery, temple-like churches, weapons, pumps, hoists, urban designs, and fortified castles. In church design, he shared with Leonardo and Bramante a preference for a symmetrical Greek cross interior, in which the central plan has the same length for the nave and transept.

An official cultural diplomacy request was sent from Milan’s ducal court to the council of Siena describing the importance of the tiburio project and asking that Francesco be permitted to come work on it. The response was reluctant acquiescence. The Siena councilors insisted that his work in Milan be done quickly, because he had many incomplete projects in Siena. By early June, Francesco was in Milan working on a new model for the tiburio.

A grand meeting was held later that month in the presence of Ludovico Sforza and the deputies of the cathedral. After inspecting three alternatives, they accepted Francesco’s recommendations and chose two local architect-engineers who had been part of the competition. The result was an ornate, octagonal Gothic tower (fig. 36). It was very different from Leonardo’s more graceful and Florentine approach, and he withdrew from the process.

Leonardo nevertheless remained interested in church design, and he made more than seventy other drawings of beautiful domes and idealized plans for church interiors at the same time that he was studying the transformations of shapes and ways to square a circle. His most interesting church designs featured floor plans that imbedded circles inside squares to form a variety of shapes, with the altar in the center, which were intended to evoke a harmonious relationship between man and the world.9





A TRIP WITH FRANCESCO TO PAVIA


While they were working together on the Milan Cathedral’s tiburio project in June 1490, Leonardo and Francesco di Giorgio took a trip to the town of Pavia, twenty-five miles away, where a new cathedral was being built (fig. 39). The authorities in Pavia, knowing of the work that Leonardo and Francesco were doing in Milan, had asked Ludovico Sforza to send them as consultants. Ludovico wrote to his secretary, “The building supervisors of this city’s cathedral have requested that we agree to provide them with that Sienese engineer employed by the building supervisors of the cathedral in Milan.” He was referring to Francesco, whose name he apparently could not remember. In a postscript, he added that “Master Leonardo of Florence” should also be sent.

Fig. 39. Pavia Cathedral.



Ludovico’s secretary replied that Francesco could leave Milan in eight days, after his preliminary report on the tiburio was in hand. “Master Leonardo the Florentine,” he added, “is always ready, whenever he is asked.” Apparently Leonardo was eager to travel with Francesco. “If you send the Sienese engineer, he will come too,” the secretary reported. The expense accounts of the Pavia authorities list a hotel payment on June 21: “Paid to Giovanni Agostino Berneri, host of Il Saracino, in Pavia, for expenses he incurred because of Masters Francesco of Siena and Leonardo of Florence, the engineers with their colleagues, attendants and horses, both of whom were summoned for a consultation about the building.”10

Their friend and collaborator in Milan, Donato Bramante, had given advice a few years earlier on the design for Pavia’s proposed cathedral. In contrast to Milan’s cathedral, the resulting plan was decidedly non-Gothic, which made it more to Leonardo’s taste. It had a simple façade and a very symmetrical interior design based on the Greek cross layout, with both the nave and the transept having the same length. That produced a balanced and equally proportioned geometric elegance. Like the churches that Bramante designed, most notably Saint Peter’s Basilica in the Vatican, as well as the ones that Leonardo sketched in his notebooks, the plan featured circles and squares forming very harmonious and balanced areas.11

Francesco was at that time revising the manuscript of his treatise on architecture, and he discussed it with Leonardo as they traveled together. Leonardo would eventually acquire a lavishly illustrated copy. They also discussed another, more venerable book. In the thousand-volume Visconti library in the castle in Pavia there was a beautiful manuscript copy of an architectural treatise by Vitruvius, a Roman military officer and engineer from the first century BC. For years Francesco had been struggling to compile a translation of Vitruvius from Latin into Italian. There were many variations in the manuscript copies made of Vitruvius over the centuries, and he wanted to study the fourteenth-century copy that existed in Pavia. So did Leonardo.12





VITRUVIUS


Marcus Vitruvius Pollio, born around 80 BC, served in the Roman army under Caesar and specialized in the design and construction of artillery machines. His duties took him to what are now Spain and France and as far away as North Africa. Vitruvius later became an architect and worked on a temple, no longer in existence, in the town of Fano in Italy. His most important work was literary, the only surviving book on architecture from classical antiquity: De Architectura, known today as The Ten Books on Architecture.13

For many dark centuries, Vitruvius’s work had been forgotten, but in the early 1400s it was one of the many pieces of classical writing, including Lucretius’s epic poem On the Nature of Things and Cicero’s orations, that were rediscovered and collected by the pioneering Italian humanist Poggio Bracciolini. At a monastery in Switzerland, Poggio found an eighth-century copy of Vitruvius’s opus, and he sent it back to Florence. There it became part of the firmament of rediscovered classical works that birthed the Renaissance. Brunelleschi used it as a reference when he traveled to Rome as a young man to measure and study the ruins of classical buildings, and Alberti quoted it extensively in his treatise on architecture. A Latin edition was published in the late 1480s by one of Italy’s new print shops, and Leonardo wrote in a notebook, “Enquire at the stationers about Vitruvius.”14

What made Vitruvius’s work appealing to Leonardo and Francesco was that it gave concrete expression to an analogy that went back to Plato and the ancients, one that had become a defining metaphor of Renaissance humanism: the relationship between the microcosm of man and the macrocosm of the earth.

