CHAPTER 30




* * *





Pointing the Way



THE WORD BECOMES FLESH


During the decade of 1506–16, as he wandered between Milan and Rome pursuing his passions and seeking patronage, Leonardo worked on three paintings that have an elegiac and spiritual quality, as if he realized that his days were numbered and was contemplating what lay on the road ahead. These include two sensuous paintings of Saint John the Baptist, one of them converted into a rendering of Bacchus by someone many years later, and a painting of an angel of the Annunciation that has been lost. They feature, as do their related drawings, a sweetly androgynous young man with an enigmatic aura, looking (or perhaps even leering) directly at the viewer and pointing a finger. Despite his immersion into science, or perhaps because of it, Leonardo had developed an ever-deepening appreciation for the profound spiritual mystery of our place in the cosmos. And as Kenneth Clark noted, “Mystery to Leonardo was a shadow, a smile and a finger pointing into darkness.”1

What distinguishes these paintings is not that they have a religious theme; like the work of every other Renaissance master, most of Leonardo’s paintings did. Nor are they the only times that Leonardo used a pointing gesture; Saint Anne in the Burlington House cartoon and Saint Thomas in The Last Supper both point upward. What makes this late trio of paintings distinctive is that the spiritual pointing gesture is directed personally to us, the viewer. When this late-career version of the angel of the Annunciation delivers his divine message, he is speaking and gesturing not to the Virgin Mary but to us. Likewise, in both pictures of Saint John, he is looking intimately at us, pointing the way to our own salvation.

Some critics over the centuries have asserted that Leonardo marred the spiritual nature of these pieces—perhaps heretically and intentionally so—by giving them an erotic allure. A cataloguer of the French royal collection complained in 1625 that the Saint John painting “does not please because it does not arouse feelings of devotion.” In a similar vein, Kenneth Clark wrote, “Our whole sense of propriety is outraged,” adding that the depiction of Saint John is “almost blasphemously unlike the fiery ascetic of the Gospels.”2

I doubt Leonardo thought he was being blasphemous or heretical, nor should we. The seductive and sensuous elements of these works enhance rather than lessen the powerful spiritual intimacy that Leonardo intended them to convey. Saint John comes across as less the Baptist than the Seducer, but in portraying him this way Leonardo connected the spiritual to the sensual. By highlighting the ambiguity between spirit and flesh, Leonardo gave his own charged meaning to “the Word became flesh and dwelt among us.”3





SAINT JOHN THE BAPTIST


From sketches in his notebook, we know that Leonardo had already begun working on his portrait of Saint John the Baptist (fig. 128) while in Milan in 1509.4 But as with many of his late paintings, most of which he ended up working on out of personal passion rather than to fulfill a commission, he carried it around with him and intermittently enhanced it until the end of his life. His focus was on the saint’s eyes, mouth, and gesture. The close-up of him emerging from the darkness confronts us starkly. There are no distracting landscapes or lights, and only the Leonardesque ringlets of hair provide any ornamentation.

Fig. 128. Saint John the Baptist.



As he gestures heavenward in a recognition of divine providence, John is also pointing toward the source of the light that radiates on him, thus fulfilling his biblical role “to bear witness of the Light.”5 Leonardo’s use of chiaroscuro, contrasting deep shadows with striking illumination, not only enhances the sense of mystery of the scene; it also conveys a powerful feeling of John’s role as witness to the true Light.6

John wears one of the enigmatic smiles that became a Leonardo signature, but it has a come-hither naughtiness to it that is missing in the smiles of Saint Anne and the Mona Lisa. His smile beckons in ways that are sultry and seductive as well as spiritual. That gives the picture its erotic frisson, as does John’s androgynous appearance. His shoulders and chest are broad yet feminine. The model seems to be Salai, with his soft face and cascade of curls.

Leonardo’s oil-painting technique, which involved applying multiple thin layers of translucent glazes, was by now even more painstaking and slow. He rushed no painting, to a fault. In Saint John the Baptist, this pace enhanced the delicacy of his sfumato. The contours are soft, the lines are blurred, and the transitions between light and dark are exceedingly subtle.

There is, however, one exception. Leonardo has painted John’s hand with a greater sharpness and clarity, just as he had done with the blessing hand of Christ in Salvator Mundi. The line separating John’s pointing index finger from his second finger is as distinct as any line in any of Leonardo’s paintings, almost like one of Michelangelo’s. It is possible this is due to a misguided restoration at some point. But I suspect it was intentional on Leonardo’s part, especially since he uses a similar sharp delineation for the pointing hand in what became the Bacchus version of the painting. With his theory of acuity perspective, Leonardo knew that such sharpness would make the hand appear nearer, as if in a different plane. There is a visual disjuncture: the hand is positioned at the same distance as the softly delineated arm, but because it is sharper it seems to pop out toward us and be more in focus.7





SAINT JOHN WITH THE ATTRIBUTES OF BACCHUS


Fig. 129. Saint John converted to a Bacchus.



The other variation of this theme to emerge from Leonardo’s studio—probably based on a drawing by Leonardo and partly painted by him, but also the product of others in his workshop—shows a full-length Saint John sitting on a dark rock formation with a sunny landscape of a mountain and a river to his right (fig. 129). In an inventory of Salai’s estate in 1525, it is referred to as a large-scale painting of Saint John, and it is identified this way in an inventory of the French royal art collection at Fontainebleau in 1625. But in a subsequent inventory of that collection done in 1695, the designation of Saint John is crossed out and replaced by “Bacchus in a landscape.” From this we can surmise that, sometime in the late 1600s, the painting was altered, perhaps for reasons of religious and sexual propriety, to turn Saint John into Bacchus, the Roman god of wine and revelry.8

There was once a beautiful red-chalk preparatory drawing by Leonardo for this painting housed in a small museum at a mountaintop religious sanctuary above the town of Varese, north of Milan. It showed Saint John sitting on a rocky ledge, his left leg crossed atop his right, his body muscular but a bit fleshy, like Salai’s, his eyes set deep in shadow and staring at us intensely. “I have seldom seen an original Leonardo of more revealing character,” Carlo Pedretti wrote in the early 1970s after making a pilgrimage to view it.9 Sadly, the drawing was stolen from the little museum in 1973, and it has not been publicly seen since. In this drawing, Leonardo had depicted Saint John completely nude, and there is evidence that is the way he was originally rendered in the painting. But when he was converted from a Baptist to a Bacchus, a leopard-skin cloth was placed over his crotch, a wreath of ivy was put on his head, and his staff or cross was turned into a thyrsus. Leonardo’s discomforting ambiguity between spirit and flesh was thus replaced by a less jarring depiction of a pagan god whose lustiness is not heretical.10

In both Leonardo’s drawing and in the painting, the most striking element is the pointing gesture. Instead of pointing heavenward, as in Leonardo’s starker rendition of the saint, this time he is pointing off into the darkness to his left, out of the scene of the picture. As with The Last Supper, the viewer can almost hear the words that accompany the gesture, in this case John heralding the arrival of “he who cometh after me, whose sandals I am not worthy to carry.”11

The smile is not as seductive and the body is more muscular and masculine than in Leonardo’s other treatment of Saint John, but the face is just as androgynous and the curls just as Salaicious. Once again, the pointing hand as well as the left leg are more sharply delineated than is typical of Leonardo, whose signature sfumato is evident in other parts of the picture. It is unclear whether this is because the leg and hand were retouched or were the work of a student, or because Leonardo made their lines sharper so they would feel closer to the viewer. I suspect it was the latter.





ANGEL OF THE ANNUNCIATION AND ANGEL INCARNATE


Fig. 130. Copy of the lost Angel of the Annunciation.



Around this time, Leonardo painted another pointing figure, an angel of the Annunciation making a gesture that was similar to that in Saint John the Baptist. The painting is now lost, but we know what it looked like from copies made by some of Leonardo’s followers, including one by Bernardino Luini (fig. 130). There is also a charcoal drawing of it (fig. 131) by a student on one of Leonardo’s notebook pages, which is surrounded by Leonardo’s own drawings of horses and men and geometrical figures. On the student’s sketch, Leonardo used his left-handed hatches to correct the pointing arm to put it in the proper foreshortened perspective.

Fig. 131. Student sketch of Angel of the Annunciation, corrected by Leonardo.



The scene of the Annunciation, in which the angel Gabriel announces to the Virgin Mary that she will become the mother of Christ, was the subject of the first painting that Leonardo did mainly on his own during the early 1470s, while working in Verrocchio’s studio (fig. 11). This time, however, there is no Virgin Mary in the picture for the angel to address. Instead, he looks directly at us, and his upward-pointing gesture seems addressed to us. Like Saint John, he is heralding the impending arrival of Christ the savior in human form, a miraculous union of spirit and flesh.

The angel and Saint John are depicted in the exact same pose, with the same come-hither stare, enigmatic smile, seductive cocking of the head and twisting of the neck, and glorious curls lustrously lit. Only the arm of the hand pointing to heaven has changed. Saint John is turning to the left, so the upraised arm is seen going across the body. Then as now, Leonardo’s boy angels are feminine to the point of being androgynous; it is true of the angel in his early Annunciation and also of the one in Virgin of the Rocks. In this new Annunciation, the androgyny is more pronounced than ever. The angel has budding breasts, and his face is even more girlish.

Fig. 132. Angel Incarnate, with breasts and erection.



There is another drawing of the angel, one that is astonishing and still controversial. Made around 1513, while Leonardo was in Rome, it shows a lewdly leering transgender version of the Angel of the Annunciation with female breasts and a large erect penis (fig. 132). Known as the Angel Incarnate or Angel in the Flesh, it is the extreme example of Leonardo’s dance around what he viewed as the ambiguous border between flesh and spirit as well as the one between feminine and masculine.

Although it is on one of Leonardo’s sheets of blue-tinted paper, which he used for many of his anatomical studies and drawings of mirrors, it is unlikely that he was the primary draftsman of this Angel Incarnate. It is not rendered beautifully, and it is delineated and shaded clumsily, without Leonardo’s distinctive left-handed hatching. It seems to have been drawn by the same student—probably Salai—who drew the notebook sketch of the Angel of the Annunciation that Leonardo corrected; the smile, the gesture, the hollow eyes, the pose, and even the flawed foreshortening of the raised arm are similar. Since it was done on Leonardo’s paper, it was likely done for his amusement and perhaps with a few corrections by him, just as he had corrected the Angel of the Annunciation drawing.

The result looks like a catamite, eager to please, signaling a willingness for an assignation. The juxtaposition of the angel’s female-nippled breasts and girlish face with its prominent erection and dangling balls makes the drawing a cross between playful caricature and hermaphroditic pornography. The drawing echoes the theme from Leonardo’s Saint John drawings: it combines the angelic and the devilish, and it links spiritual aspiration with sexual arousal. At one point someone apparently tried to erase the penis but succeeded mainly in rubbing away the blue tint of the paper and leaving some erasure marks.12

The history of the drawing is a bit mysterious, perhaps because the British royal family, in whose collection it once resided, was embarrassed by it. One story is that a German scholar came to view it at the Royal Library and whisked it away under his cape; whether or not that is true, it was rediscovered in 1990 in the private collection of an aristocratic German family.13

A counterpoint to the gesturing androgynous angels and saints is a poetic and sweet drawing known as the Pointing Lady (fig. 133), which the renowned scholar Carlo Pedretti called “perhaps the most beautiful drawing by Leonardo.”14 The subject has the same mysterious and enticing smile as her male counterparts, and she likewise is looking directly at us, directing our attention to a mystery unseen. But unlike Leonardo’s various angels of the period, there is nothing devilish about her.

Fig. 133. Pointing Lady.



The black-chalk drawing is simple, but it encompasses many facets of Leonardo’s life and work: his love of plays and pageants, his feel for fantasy, his mastery of enigmatic smiles, his ability to make women come alive, and the twisting movement. It is filled with the curls and spirals that Leonardo loved: there is a hint of a stream and waterfall creating eddies, and there are flowers and reeds whose curves echo those of the lady’s diaphanous dress and blowing hair.

Most notably, the lady is pointing. In his last decade, Leonardo is mesmerized by that gesture, the signal of tidings borne by a mysterious guide who has come to show us the way. The drawing may have been meant as an illustration for Dante’s Purgatorio, showing the beautiful Matelda, who guides the poet through ritual bathings in a forest, or it could have been a drawing for a costume pageant. But whatever was the original intent, it became more. It is a profoundly expressive and poetic drawing by a man entering the twilight and still searching for guidance about the eternal mysteries that his science and his art have not, and cannot, explain.





