CHAPTER 6




* * *





Court Entertainer



PLAYS AND PAGEANTS


Leonardo da Vinci’s entrée into the court of Ludovico Sforza came not as an architect or engineer but as a producer of pageants. As a spectacle-loving apprentice in Verrocchio’s Florence workshop, he had become enthralled by staging fantasies, a talent that also happened to be much in demand in Sforza’s Milan court, which thrived on plays and public entertainments. There were many elements, both artistic and technical, involved in producing such festivities, and all of them appealed to Leonardo: stage designs, costumes, scenery, music, mechanisms, choreography, allegorical allusions, automatons, and gadgets.

From our vantage centuries later, the time and creativity Leonardo applied to such ephemeral affairs seem wasted. There is nothing to show for the dazzling displays except snippets of reports that recount the fleeting moments of splendor. The time he spent could have been more usefully applied, it might seem, to finishing the Adoration of the Magi or Saint Jerome. But just as today we love halftime shows and Broadway extravaganzas, fireworks displays and choreographed performances, the events staged by the Sforza court were considered vital, and their producers, including Leonardo, were highly valued. The entertainments were even educational at times, like an ideas festival; there were demonstrations of science, debates over the relative merits of various art forms, and displays of ingenious devices, all of which were a precursor to the public science and edifying discourse that later became popular during the Enlightenment.

By calling on historical and religious imagery, these shows served to legitimize Sforza family rule, which is why Ludovico turned them into an industry. Architects, mechanics, musicians, poets, performers, and military engineers were all engaged in executing them. For Leonardo, who thought of himself as a member of all of these categories, it was the perfect way to earn a role in the Sforza court.

Ludovico’s grander pageants served to amuse and distract not only Milan’s populace but also his young nephew Gian Galeazzo Sforza, the titular duke until his mysterious death in 1494. Through a combination of feigned solicitousness and intimidation, Ludovico was able to beguile his nephew and induce him to crave his uncle’s affection. He encouraged the young man’s debauchery, indulged his drinking, and allowed him to preside over the pageants that were performed at court. One festivity Leonardo worked on was the extravaganza that Ludovico orchestrated in 1490 for his nephew’s marriage, at age twenty, to Isabella of Aragon, the Princess of Naples.

The centerpiece of the wedding celebration was a performance and feast, filled with sounds and lights and pageantry, of a theatrical extravaganza entitled The Feast of Paradise, which climaxed with a stage piece, The Masque of the Planets. It had a libretto by one of Ludovico’s favorite poets, Bernardo Bellincioni, who later wrote that the scenery was “made with great brilliance and skill by Maestro Leonardo Vinci, the Florentine.” Leonardo created panels that depicted inspiring moments of the Sforza family reign, decorated the silk-clad walls of the long hall of the Sforza Castle with symbol-laden foliage, and designed the fanciful costumes.

The play was an allegorical pageant that began with a masked procession in which the players were introduced and then greeted by a Turkish cavalcade. The bride was serenaded by a procession of actors playing ambassadors from Spain, Poland, Hungary, and other exotic lands, and the appearance of each one became a cause for dancing. The music drowned out most of the whirring of the mechanical devices moving the scenery.

At midnight, after much dancing by the players and spectators, the music stopped and the curtain rose on a celestial curved vault that Leonardo had constructed in the shape of a half egg that was gilded with gold on the inside. Torches served as the stars, and in the background the signs of the Zodiac were illuminated. Actors portrayed the seven known planets, turning and revolving in the proper orbits. “You will see great things in honor of Isabella and her virtues,” an angel announced. In his notebooks, Leonardo recorded the expenses for “gold and the glue to affix the gold” and twenty-five pounds of wax “to make the stars.” It culminated with gods—led by Jupiter and Apollo and followed by the Graces and Virtues—descending from their pedestals to shower verses of praise on the new duchess.1

Leonardo’s triumph designing The Masque of the Planets brought him a modest amount of fame—more than he had received as a painter of unfinished panels and certainly more than he had ever earned as a military engineer. It also delighted him. His notebooks show the interest he took in the mechanism of the automated props and scenery changes. The interplay of fantasy and machinery was something he was born to choreograph.

Another extravaganza was staged the following year, when Ludovico married the politically connected and culturally savvy Beatrice d’Este, a member of one of Italy’s most prominent families. A great jousting tournament was planned, and Leonardo arranged the pageant that accompanied it. He recorded in his notebook visiting the site in order to help some of the footmen, who were going to play the role of primitive savages, try on the loincloths he had designed as their costume.

For the pageant, Leonardo again combined his theatrical skills with his love of allegories. “First a wonderful steed appeared, all covered with gold scales which the artist has colored like peacock eyes,” Ludovico’s secretary recorded. “Hanging from the warrior’s golden helmet was a winged serpent, whose tail touched the horse’s back.” Leonardo described his allegorical intentions in a notebook: “Above the helmet place a half globe, which is to signify our hemisphere. Every ornament belonging to the horse should be of peacock feathers on a gold background, to signify the beauty which comes of the grace bestowed on him who is a good servant.”2 The steed was followed by the horde of cavemen and savages. It was typical of Leonardo’s desire to indulge in the scary and exotic; he had an affinity for bizarre demons and dragons.

Leonardo’s technical and artistic talents were again combined in January 1496, when he staged one of the most extravagant plays of the era, a five-act comedy titled La Danae written by Ludovico’s chancellor and court poet, Baldassare Taccone. Leonardo’s notes included a list of the actors and their scenes, a drawing of the stage set, and mechanical diagrams of the machinery for changing scenery and creating special effects. His floor plan shows two elevation drawings done in perspective, and he made a sketch of one scene that depicts a god sitting in a flaming niche. The play was filled with special effects and mechanical feats that Leonardo designed: Mercury descended from above using an intricate system of ropes and pulleys; Jupiter was transformed into a rain of gold dust to impregnate Danae; and at one point the sky was lit “by an infinite number of lamps like stars.”3

His most complex mechanical designs were of the revolving stages for a theatrical scene that he labeled “Pluto’s Paradise.” A mountain was opened up in halves to display Hades. “When Pluto’s paradise is opened, there will be devils who are playing on twelve pots like openings into hell, creating infernal noises,” Leonardo wrote. “Here will be Death, the Furies, ashes, many naked children weeping; living fires made of various colors.” Then comes a pithy stage direction: “Dances follow.”4 His moveable stages included two semicircular amphitheaters that were initially facing each other and closed into a sphere, and then were swung open and rotated so they would be back to back.

The mechanical elements of the theatrical events interested Leonardo as much as the artistic ones, and he saw them as connected. He delighted in making ingenious contraptions that would fly, descend, and animate in ways that would excite his audiences. Before he had fully begun his writings on the flight of birds, he made a light sketch in his notebook of a mechanical bird, wings outstretched, attached to a guide string, with the caption “A bird for a comedy.”5

Leonardo’s work producing theatrical pageants was enjoyable and remunerative, but it also served a larger purpose. It required him to execute his fantasies. Unlike paintings, performances had real deadlines. They had to be ready when the curtains parted. He could not cling to them and seek to perfect them indefinitely.

Some of the devices that he made, most notably mechanical birds and wings for actors suspended above the stage, spurred him on to more serious scientific studies, including observing birds and envisioning real flying machines. In addition, his love of stage gestures was reflected in his narrative paintings. The time he spent engaged with theatrical amusements stimulated his imagination in both art and engineering.





MUSIC


Leonardo had originally come to the Sforza court partly as a musical envoy bearing his own specially designed version of an instrument that was popular among court entertainers. It was a type of lyre to be held like a fiddle, with five strings meant to be played with a bow and two that were to be plucked. “It had a very bizarre and unusual design that he had made with his own hands,” Vasari wrote, “mainly out of silver, in the shape of a horse skull, made so that the harmony might be fuller and more sonorous in tone.” Poets used the lira da braccio as an accompaniment when they sang their verses, and it was featured in paintings of angels by Raphael and others.

Leonardo knew how to play the lyre “with rare distinction,” according to the Anonimo, “and also taught lyre playing to Atalante Migliorotti.” His repertoire ranged from the classical love poems of Petrarch to witty lyrics he concocted himself, and he won a contest in Florence with one of his performances. The humanist and physician Paolo Giovio, a near contemporary who met Leonardo in Milan, wrote, “He was a connoisseur and marvelous inventor of all beautiful things, especially in the field of stage performances, and sang masterfully to his own accompaniment on the lyre. When he played the lyre with the bow, he miraculously pleased all princes.”6

There are no musical compositions in his notebooks. Rather than reading music or composing lyrics, he improvised when performing at the Sforza court. “Since by nature he possessed a lofty and graceful spirit,” Vasari explained, “he sang divinely, improvising his own accompaniment on the lyre.”

Vasari recounted one special performance that Leonardo gave at the Milan court in 1494, when Ludovico was officially crowned duke after the death of his nephew: “Leonardo, with great fanfare, was brought to the duke to play for him, since the duke had a great liking for the sound of the lyre, and Leonardo brought the instrument which he had built with his own hands. With this, he surpassed all the musicians who came there to play. In addition, he was the best improviser of verses of his time.”

Leonardo also dreamed up new instruments as part of his role as a producer of pageants. His notebooks are filled with sketches both innovative and fanciful. As usual, his creativity came from his combinatory imagination. After sketching a few conventional instruments on a page, he concocted one that drew together elements from a variety of different animals to make a dragon-like creature. Another page shows a three-string violin-like instrument that had a goat’s skull, a bird’s beak, and some feathers, with the strings fastened to teeth carved at one end.7

His musical inventions were the product of both his engineering instincts and his fancy for entertainment. He came up with innovative ways to control the vibrations, and thus the pitch and tones, produced by bells, drums, or strings. On one of his notebook pages, for example, he drew a mechanized ringing instrument (fig. 25) composed of a stationary metal bell flanked by two hammers and four dampers on levers that could be operated by keys to touch the bell at different places. Leonardo knew that a bell has different areas that, depending on their shape and thickness, produce different tones. By dampening up to four of these in different combinations, he could turn a bell into a keyboard instrument that played a variety of pitches. “When struck by the hammers, there will be a change of tones like in an organ,” he wrote.8

Fig. 25. Keyboard-operated bell.



He likewise tried to create instruments based on drums with different pitches. Some of his sketches involve combining drum skins stretched to various levels of tension. In other cases, he proposed ways to use levers and screws to change the tension of the drum skin while it was being played.9 He also drew a snare drum with a long cylinder that had holes in its side, like a flute. “Closing of the various holes while beating the skin results in clear pitch differences,” he explained.10 Another method was simpler: he lashed together twelve kettle drums of different sizes and devised a keyboard that allowed each to be hit with a mechanical hammer; the result was a cross between a drum set and a harpsichord.11

The most complex of Leonardo’s musical instruments, which he drew in many variations on ten different pages of his notebooks, was the viola organista, a cross between a violin and an organ.12 Like a violin, its sound was produced by moving a bow back and forth across some strings, but in this case the bow was moved mechanically. Like an organ, it was played by pressing keys on a keyboard to determine which notes should be produced. In his final and most complex version, a set of wheels turned bowstrings that were looped like the fan belt in a car; pushing a key would cause one of the violin strings to be pressed down onto one of the looping bows, thus producing the desired tone. Multiple strings could be played at once, creating chords. Unlike with a regular bow, the tone produced by the fan belt could be sustained indefinitely. The viola organista was a brilliant idea that attempted to combine, in a way that is still not done today, the multitude of notes and chords that a keyboard can produce with the timbre, or tone color, that comes from a stringed instrument.13

What started as ways to amuse the Sforza court soon became serious attempts to make better musical instruments. “Leonardo’s instruments are not merely diverting devices for performing magic tricks,” according to Emanuel Winternitz, a curator of musical instruments at the Metropolitan Museum in New York. “Instead, they are systematic efforts by Leonardo to realize some basic aims.”14 These include new ways to use keyboards, play faster, and increase the range of available tones and sounds. In addition to earning him financial stipends and an entrée at court, his musical pursuits launched him onto more substantive paths: they laid the ground for his work on the science of percussion—how striking an object can produce vibrations, waves, and reverberations—and exploring the analogy between sound waves and water waves.





ALLEGORICAL DRAWINGS


Ludovico Sforza loved complex coats of arms, clever heraldic displays, and family emblems with metaphorical meanings. He owned ornate helmets and shields adorned with personal symbols, and his courtiers created ingenious designs to exalt his virtues, allude to his triumphs, and play with puns on his name. This led to a series of allegorical drawings made by Leonardo that were intended, I think, to be shown at court accompanied by his spoken explanations and tales. Some were designed to justify Ludovico’s role as de facto ruler and protector of his feckless nephew. In one, the titular young duke is pictured as a cockerel (the word for cockerel, galleto, is a play on the boy’s name, Galeazzo) being attacked by a swarm of birds, foxes, and a two-horned fantasy satyr. Protecting him, and serving as representations of Ludovico, are two beautiful virtues, Justice and Prudence. Justice holds a brush and a serpent, which were heraldic symbols of the Sforzas, and Prudence holds a mirror.15

Although the allegorical sketches he made while serving Ludovico ostensibly portray the traits of others, a few seem to reveal Leonardo’s own inner turmoil. Most notable are the dozen or so drawings depicting Envy. “No sooner is Virtue born than Envy comes into the world to attack it,” he wrote on one of them. In his written description of Envy, he seems to have confronted her, in himself and in his competitors: “Envy should be represented with an obscene gesture of the hand towards heaven,” he wrote. “Victory and truth are odious to her. Many thunderbolts should proceed from her to signify her evil speaking. Let her be lean and haggard because she is in perpetual torment. Make her heart gnawed by a swelling serpent.”16

Leonardo portrayed Envy along these lines in several allegorical drawings. He showed her as a wizened hag with sagging breasts on the back of a crawling skeleton accompanied by the explanation “Make her ride upon death, because Envy never dies.”17 Another drawing on the same page portrays her intertwined with Virtue, a serpent springing forth from her tongue, while Virtue tries to stab her in the eyes with an olive branch. Not surprisingly, Ludovico is sometimes depicted as her nemesis. He is shown holding out a pair of eyeglasses to unmask her lies as she cowers away from him. “Il Moro with spectacles, and Envy depicted with False Report,” Leonardo captioned the drawing.18





THE GROTESQUES


Another set of drawings that Leonardo produced for the amusement of the Sforza court were pen-and-ink caricatures of funny-looking people he dubbed “visi mostruosi” (monstrous faces), which are now commonly called his “grotesques.” Most are small, just under the size of a credit card. Satirical in intent, they were, like his allegorical drawings, probably accompaniments to spoken tales, jokes, or performances at the castle. At least two dozen originals survive (fig. 26), and there are many close copies produced by the students in his studio (fig. 27).19 The grotesques were reproduced or mimicked by later artists, most notably the seventeenth-century Bohemian etcher Wenceslaus Hollar and the nineteenth-century British illustrator John Tenniel, who used them as models for the Ugly Duchess and other characters in Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland.

Fig. 26. Leonardo’s craggy warrior and a grotesque.



Fig. 27. Copy of a grotesque from Leonardo’s studio.



With his finely honed ability to see both beauty and ugliness, Leonardo was able to create a satirical combination in his grotesques. As he wrote in his notes for his treatise on painting, “If the painter wishes to see beauties that charm him, it lies within his power to create them; and if he wishes to see monstrosities that are frightful, buffoonish, or ridiculous, or pitiable, he can be lord thereof.”20

The grotesques are examples of how Leonardo’s observational skills became fodder for his imagination. He would walk the streets with a notebook dangling from his belt, find a group of people with exaggerated features who would make good models, and invite them over for supper. “Sitting close to them,” his early biographer Lomazzo recounted, “Leonardo then proceeded to tell the maddest and most ridiculous tales imaginable, making them laugh uproariously. He observed all their gestures very attentively and those ridiculous things they were doing, and impressed them on his mind; and after they had left, he retired to his room and there made a perfect drawing.” Lomazzo indicated that part of the purpose was to amuse his patrons at the Sforza court. The drawings “moved those who looked at them to laughter, as if they had been moved by Leonardo’s stories at the feast!”21

In notes for his treatise on painting, Leonardo recommended to young artists this practice of walking around town, finding people to use as models, and recording the most interesting ones in a portable notebook: “Take a note of them with slight strokes in a little book which you should always carry with you,” he wrote. “The positions of the people are so infinite that the memory is incapable of retaining them, which is why you should keep these sketches as your guides.”22

Sometimes Leonardo used a pen on such face-hunting excursions, and when that was not practical in an outdoor setting he used a stylus. The sharp silverpoint of the stylus made lines on paper that had been coated with ground chicken bones, soot, or other chalky powders, sometimes colored with pulverized minerals. The metal point oxidized this coating, producing silvery gray lines. He also occasionally used chalk, charcoal, or lead. As was his nature, he was constantly experimenting with drawing methods.23

These face-finding excursions, along with the sketches that resulted, helped Leonardo in his quest to find ways to relate facial features to inner emotions. At least since the time of Aristotle, who declared, “It is possible to infer character from features,”24 people had tried to find ways to assess people’s innate personality from their head shapes and facial characteristics, a study known as physiognomy. With his empirical mind, Leonardo rejected the scientific validity of this method and dismissed it as akin to astrology and alchemy. “I will not dwell on false physiognomy and palm-reading, because there is no truth in them, and illusions of this kind have no scientific foundation,” he insisted.

But even though he did not consider physiognomy a science, he did believe that facial expressions indicate underlying causes. “Characteristics of the face partly reveal the character of men, their vices and temperaments,” he wrote. “If the features which separate the cheeks from the lips, or the nostrils from the cavities of the eyes, are strongly pronounced, they belong to cheerful and good-humored men.” Those without such distinctive lines are more contemplative, he added, and those “whose facial features stand out in great relief are brutal, bad-tempered, and men of little reason.” He went on to associate heavy lines between the eyebrows with bad temper, strong lines on the forehead with regrets, and concluded, “It is possible to discuss many features this way.”25

He developed a trick for noting these features of a face so that he could draw them later. It involved a shorthand for ten types of nose (“straight, bulbous, hollow . . .”), eleven types of facial shape, and various other characteristics that could be categorized. When he found a person he wished to draw, he would use this shorthand so that he could re-create him or her when he got back to his studio. With the grotesque faces, however, that was not necessary because they were so memorable. “Of grotesque faces I need say nothing, because they are kept in mind without difficulty,” he declared.26

Fig. 28. Five heads.



The most memorable of Leonardo’s grotesque drawings is one of five heads that he did around 1494 (fig. 28). The central figure is an old man, with the aquiline nose and jutting jaw that Leonardo favored for his typical aging warrior character. He is wearing a wreath of oak leaves and trying to maintain a dignified pose while in fact looking a bit gullible and foolish. The four characters surrounding him are laughing maniacally or smirking.

Leonardo likely drew the scene as part of a facetious tale that he recounted for the amusement of the Sforza court, but no notes survive. That is fortunate, because it allows us to apply our own imagination to the drawing and to Leonardo. Perhaps the man is about to marry the “pug-faced crone” depicted in one of Leonardo’s other drawings from the same time, and his friends are showing a mix of derision and compassion. Maybe the drawing is an exaggerated illustration of human traits, such as lunacy and dementia and megalomania.

A more plausible explanation, since this was probably for a performance at court, is that there was a narrative story involved. The man on the right seems to be holding the hand of the wreathed central character, while the man on the left is reaching around his back toward his pocket. Could it be a scene of a man having his palm read and being pickpocketed by gypsies, as Windsor’s curator Martin Clayton suggests?27 Gypsies from the Balkans had spread throughout Europe in the fifteenth century and become such a nuisance in Milan that they were banished by a decree in 1493. In his notebooks, Leonardo mentioned a portrayal of a gypsy in a list of his drawings, and he also recorded spending 6 soldi for a fortune-teller. All of this is speculative, and that is one of the many things that make Leonardo’s works, including those with a bit of mystery, so wonderful: his fantasia is infectious.





LITERARY AMUSEMENTS


Another contribution that Leonardo made to life at the Sforza court were little literary amusements, which were also primarily intended to be read aloud or performed. There are at least three hundred of them in his notebooks, in a variety of forms: fables, facetious tales, prophecies, pranks, and riddles. These are scattered in the margins of pages or next to unrelated items, so we know they were not intended to be collections on their own. Instead, they were produced to provide entertainment whenever the occasion warranted.

Oral performances and declamations of riddles and fables were a popular form of amusement at Renaissance courts. Leonardo even included stage directions on some; next to one cryptic prophecy he directed that it should be delivered “in a frenzied or berserk way, as of mental lunacy.”28 He was a clever conversationalist and storyteller, according to Vasari, and that served him well with these slight entertainments that might seem, in retrospect, trivial endeavors. He had not yet been established as one of history’s great geniuses, so he was hustling to curry favor at a crowded ducal court.29

The fables are pithy moral tales involving animals or objects that take on a personality. They have common themes, most notably the rewards due to virtue and prudence versus the penalties engendered by greed and haste. Although they bear some similarity to Aesop’s fables, they are shorter. Most are not particularly clever or even easily comprehensible, at least out of the context of whatever was happening at court that evening. For example, “The mole has very small eyes and it always lives underground; it lives as long as it is in the dark, but when it comes into the light it dies immediately, because it becomes known—and so it is with lies.”30 More than fifty of these fables were jotted in his notebooks during the seventeen years he spent in Milan.

Closely related are the entries in his bestiary, a compendium of short tales of animals and moral lessons based on their traits. Bestiaries were popular among the ancients and in the Middle Ages, and the spread of printing presses meant that many were reprinted in Italy beginning in the 1470s. Leonardo had a copy of the bestiary written by Pliny the Elder and three others by medieval compilers. In contrast to the entries in these collections, Leonardo’s tended to be pithy and unadorned with religious trappings. They were probably connected to emblems, heraldic shields, and performances that he created for those in the Sforza circle. “The swan is white without any spot, and it sings sweetly as it dies, its life ending with that song,” one of them states. Occasionally Leonardo appended a moral lesson to the entry, such as this: “The oyster, when the moon is full, opens itself wide, and when the crab looks in he throws in a stone or seaweed and the oyster cannot close again, whereby it serves for food to that crab. This is what happens to him who opens his mouth to tell his secret. He becomes the prey of the treacherous hearer.”31

A third type of literary amusement was one that Leonardo pioneered in the 1490s. He called them “prophecies,” and they were often little riddles or trick questions. He was particularly fond of describing some scene of darkness and destruction, in a style that mocked the prophets and doomsayers who hung around the court, then revealing that he was actually referring to something far less apocalyptic. For example, one prophecy begins, “Many people by puffing out a breath with too much haste will thereby lose their sight and soon after all consciousness,” but then Leonardo reveals that the description refers to people “blowing out the candlelight when going to bed.”

Many of the prophecy-riddles reflect Leonardo’s love for animals. “Countless numbers will have their little children taken away and their throats shall be cut,” is one prophecy, as if describing a brutal act of war and genocide. But then Leonardo, who had become a vegetarian, reveals that this prophecy refers to the sheep and cows that humans eat. “Winged creatures will support people with their feathers,” he wrote in another example, and then revealed that he was not referring to flying machines but “the feathers used to stuff mattresses.”32 As they say in show business, you had to be there.

Leonardo accompanied these literary amusements with pranks and tricks on occasion, such as flash explosions. “Boil ten pounds of brandy to evaporate, but see that the room is completely closed, and throw up some powdered varnish among the fumes,” he wrote in his notebook. “Then enter the room suddenly with a lighted torch, and at once it will be set ablaze.”33 Vasari described how Leonardo took a lizard captured by an assistant, pasted on a beard and wings, and kept it in a box to frighten his friends. He also took the intestines of a steer and “made them so fine that they could be compressed into the palm of one hand. Then he would fix one end of them to a pair of bellows lying in another room, and when they were inflated they filled the room in which they were and forced anyone standing there into a corner.”34

Puns were popular then, and Leonardo often created visual versions of them, such as when he painted a juniper in the portrait of Ginevra de’ Benci. One way he played with puns was by creating for the court cryptograms, pictographs, and rebuses, in which pictures were lined up to create a message that had to be decoded while Leonardo watched. For example, he drew an ear of corn for grain (grano in Italian) and a magnetic rock (calamita) to make a punning version of the phrase “great calamity” (gran calimità). Using both sides of a large notebook sheet, he drew more than 150 of these little puzzles, sketching them quickly, as if he were creating them in front of an audience.35

Leonardo’s notebooks also contain drafts of fantasy novellas, sometimes in the form of letters describing mysterious lands and adventures. More than a century earlier, the Florentine writer and humanist Giovanni Boccaccio had popularized tales, most notably The Decameron, that skated between fantasia and realism. Leonardo did likewise in at least two sustained drafts of long stories.

One of these was probably performed at a farewell party in 1487 for Benedetto Dei, a fellow Florentine who was part of the Sforza court in Milan. It was cast as a letter to Dei, who traveled extensively and spun wondrous (and occasionally embellished) tales. The villain is a black giant, with bloodshot eyes and a “face most horrible,” who terrorizes the inhabitants of North Africa. “He lived in the sea and fed on whales, leviathans, and ships,” Leonardo wrote. The men of the area swarm all over the giant like ants, but to no avail. “He shook his head and sent the men flying through the air like hail.”36

The tale is an early example of a theme that Leonardo would return to repeatedly until the end of his life: cataclysmic scenes of destruction and deluge that consume all earthly life. Leonardo’s narrator is swallowed by the giant and finds himself swimming in a dark void. The story ends with a lament that describes those nightmarish demons, unleashed from the shadowy cave, that plagued and drove and stymied Leonardo throughout his life. “I do not know what to say or what to do, for everywhere I seem to find myself swimming head downwards through that mighty throat and remaining buried in that huge belly, in the confusion of death.”

This dark side of Leonardo’s genius is also evident in the other fantasy novella he sketched out while working at the Milan court, which foreshadows the deluge drawings and descriptions he did near the end of his life. This one is composed as a series of letters, written by a prophet and water engineer who is clearly Leonardo himself, to “the Devatdar of Syria, Lieutenant of the Sacred Sultan of Babylon.”37 Once again the narrative involves deluge and destruction:

First we were assailed by the fury of the winds; and then followed the avalanches from the great mountains of snow which filled up all these valleys and destroyed a great part of our city. And, not content with this, the tempest with a sudden deluge of water has submerged all the lower part of this city. Added to this there came a sudden rain, or rather a ruinous storm full of water, sand, mud, and stones all mingled together with roots, stems, and branches of trees; and every kind of thing came hurtling through the air and descended upon us. Finally there came a great fire—not brought by the wind but carried, it would seem, by thirty thousand devils—completely burnt up and destroyed the country.38

The tale shows his fantasies about being a hydraulic engineer. The Syrian storm, Leonardo’s narrator recounts, is tamed by building a huge drainage tunnel through the Taurus Mountains.

Some Leonardo scholars have interpreted these writings as a sign that he was suffering bouts of madness. Others have concluded that he actually went to Armenia and had the experience of the deluge he described. I think a more reasonable explanation is that these tales, like many of the odd things Leonardo wrote, were intended for performance at court. But even if merely designed to amuse his patrons, they hint at something deeper, providing a glimpse into the psychological torments swirling in the psyche of the artist playing the entertainer.39





