CHAPTER 21




* * *





Saint Anne



THE COMMISSION


When Friar Pietro da Novellara was floundering in his mission to convince Leonardo to paint a portrait for Isabella d’Este, he wrote to her in April 1501 to explain the situation: “Since he has been in Florence, he has only made one sketch—a cartoon of a child Christ, about a year old, almost jumping out of his mother’s arms to seize hold of a lamb. The mother is in the act of rising from Saint Anne’s lap and holds back the child from the lamb, which is a symbol of the Passion.”1

The cartoon that the friar described was a full-size preparatory drawing for what would become one of Leonardo’s greatest masterpieces, the Virgin and Child with Saint Anne (fig. 79), featuring Mary sitting on the lap of her mother. The final painting combines many elements of Leonardo’s artistic genius: a moment transformed into a narrative, physical motions that match mental emotions, brilliant depictions of the dance of light, delicate sfumato, and a landscape informed by geology and color perspective. It was proclaimed to be “Leonardo da Vinci’s ultimate masterpiece” (l’ultime chef d’oeuvre) in the title of the catalogue published by the Louvre for a 2012 exhibition celebrating its restoration—this from the museum that also owns the Mona Lisa.2

The story of the commissioning of the painting probably began when Leonardo returned to Florence from Milan in 1500 and took up residence at the church of Santissima Annunziata. The monks there regularly provided accommodation to distinguished artists, and Leonardo was given five rooms for himself and his assistants. It was wonderfully convenient: the monastery had a library with five thousand volumes, and it was only three blocks from the Santa Maria Nuova hospital, where Leonardo performed his dissections.

Fig. 79. Virgin and Child with Saint Anne.



The monks had commissioned an altarpiece by Filippino Lippi, the Florentine painter who had painted an Adoration of the Magi for a nearby church after Leonardo had abandoned that commission. Leonardo let it be known that he would gladly take on the job of painting the altarpiece himself, and, as Vasari wrote, “when Filippino heard this, like the good-hearted person he was, he decided to withdraw.” Another factor working in Leonardo’s favor: his father was the notary for the church.





DIFFERENT VERSIONS


Once he got the commission, Leonardo typically procrastinated. “He kept them waiting a long time without even starting anything,” Vasari wrote, “then he finally did the cartoon showing Our Lady with Saint Anne and the Infant Christ.” The cartoon was a sensation, evidence that Leonardo was now wildly famous in his hometown and that he was leading the way for artists to rise from being nameless artisans to being individual public stars. “Men and women, young and old, continued for two days to flock for a sight of it to the room where it was, as if to a grand festival, to gaze at the marvels of Leonardo,” Vasari recorded.

Vasari was presumably referring to the cartoon that Friar Pietro had described to Isabella d’Este. Unfortunately, Vasari confused matters by reporting that the drawing also included “Saint John, depicted as a little boy playing with a lamb.” The fact that Vasari’s description does not comport exactly with that of the friar, who makes no mention of Saint John, is not surprising. It was probably just a mistake. Vasari, whose accuracy was invariably well below perfect, was writing fifty years later, and he never saw the cartoon in question. But his injection of Saint John into the picture reflects an interesting historical mystery that Leonardo scholars still wrestle with, because some of Leonardo’s versions and variations on the drawing did indeed include Saint John in place of (not playing with) the lamb.

The cartoon that Friar Pietro wrote about—comprising Anne, Mary, Jesus, and a lamb—has the same four elements as the painting now in the Louvre. But here’s the wrinkle: the only surviving cartoon by Leonardo related to this project is a drawing now in London known as the Burlington House cartoon (because of the Royal Academy headquarters where it was long displayed; fig. 80). Beautiful and haunting and large, it features Saint Anne, the Virgin Mary, and the baby Jesus, but with a young Saint John and no lamb. In other words, it is not the cartoon that Friar Pietro saw in 1501.

Fig. 80. Burlington House cartoon for Saint Anne.



Scores of Leonardo scholars have puzzled over the sequencing of the various versions of the arrangement: there is the cartoon described by Friar Pietro that was publicly displayed and then apparently lost, the surviving Burlington House cartoon, and the Louvre painting. In which order did Leonardo create these?

For much of the late twentieth century, the consensus among scholars—including Arthur Popham, Philip Pouncey, Kenneth Clark, and Carlo Pedretti—was that Leonardo began with the cartoon described by Friar Pietro (with a lamb but no Saint John) in 1501, then changed his mind and drew the Burlington House cartoon a few years later (with Saint John but no lamb), and then changed his mind again and reverted to a final painted version that resembled the 1501 drawing (lamb and no Saint John). That theory was based on stylistic grounds and because some mechanical drawings on the reverse of a sketch for the Burlington House cartoon seem to have been done around 1508.3

This contorted sequencing began to be revised in 2005, when a note by Agostino Vespucci, who was Machiavelli’s secretary and Leonardo’s friend, was found in the margin of a book by Cicero he was reading. The ancient Roman philosopher had written that the painter Apelles “perfected the head and bust of his Venus with the most elaborate art but left the rest of her body in the rough.” Vespucci wrote next to this passage, “So Leonardo da Vinci does in all his paintings, such as the head of Lisa del Giocondo, and Anne, Mother of the Virgin.” His note is dated October 1503. Thus in one little discovery there is confirmation that in 1503 Leonardo had started painting the Mona Lisa, and that he had already begun work on the Saint Anne painting.4

If Leonardo was already working on his final painting in 1503, it makes little sense to think that the Burlington House cartoon was done after that. Instead, it may have been done shortly after his return to Florence or perhaps even as early as 1499, before he left Milan. He could have been planning the painting before he got the commission, and indeed might have volunteered for the commission because he had a composition that he had initially intended to do for some other patron. “It seems likely that Leonardo began the Burlington House cartoon while he was still in Milan,” wrote Luke Syson in the catalogue for a 2011 London exhibition that included the cartoon. “His patron may well have been the French king Louis XII, whose wife was Anne of Brittany.”5

That theory that the Burlington House cartoon was the first in the sequence was reinforced in a masterful 2012 exhibition at the Louvre celebrating the completion of a twelve-year restoration of the Saint Anne painting. The exhibition brought together the painting and the Burlington House cartoon for the first time since Leonardo’s death, along with compositional sketches, preparatory drawings, and copies made by Leonardo’s students and other painters. In addition, technical studies, including multispectral analysis, of the painting and cartoon were presented. The conclusion was unequivocal, according to the curator, Vincent Delieuvin: “After working through, then abandoning the solution shown in the Burlington House cartoon, Leonardo developed a different conception and drew a second cartoon in 1501 . . . in which Saint John the Baptist had been replaced by a lamb—the one that Fra Pietro de Novellera described in a letter to Isabella d’Este.” The final painted version is based on the 1501 cartoon, but with one change: the figures are reversed. In the painting and in its underdrawing, discovered by an infrared reflectographic analysis, the lamb and the young Jesus are on the right side, not the left.6

By looking at some of the smaller sketches Leonardo made, we can see him working out options for showing how the young Jesus would squirm off his mother’s lap and wrestle with the lamb. He thinks by sketching. It is a process he called “componimento inculto,” an uncultivated composition that helps work out ideas through an intuitive process. It’s also instructive to look at the copies of the painting made in his workshop. “It has always been thought that Leonardo’s pupils and assistants created these works by copying Leonardo’s painting or his cartoons or even his drawings,” Francesca Fiorani noted, “but these ‘copies’ were actually produced while the original was in the making and they reflect alternative solutions Leonardo imagined for it.”7





THE PAINTING


It is important, Leonardo wrote, to “have a movement of a person’s limbs appropriate to that person’s mental movements.” His painting of the Virgin and Child with Saint Anne shows what he meant. Mary’s right arm is stretched as she tries to restrain the Christ child, showing a protective but gentle love. But he is intent on wrestling with the lamb, his leg over its neck and his hands grappling with its head. The lamb, as Friar Pietro told us, represents the Passion, Jesus’ fate, and he will not be restrained from it.

Both Mary and her mother look young, almost as if they were sisters, even though the apocryphal tale is that Saint Anne was past childbearing age when Mary was born through a miracle. In the cartoon that Friar Pietro described, Leonardo portrayed Saint Anne looking older. We know this because, even though that cartoon was lost, there was a good copy of it. The copy was itself lost in Budapest during World War II, but photographs and etchings of it exist. They show that Leonardo had conceived of Saint Anne as an older woman wearing a matronly cloth headdress.8 By the time he got around to executing the final painting, he had changed his mind. He made Saint Anne look much younger. In the painting, her torso and that of her daughter seem fused as they dote on the young child.

The image of a squirming boy with what looks like two mothers conjures up Leonardo’s own childhood being raised by both his birth mother, Caterina, and his slightly younger stepmother. Freud made much of this, writing, “Leonardo gave the boy two mothers, the one who stretched out her arms after him and another who is seen in the background, both are represented with the blissful smile of maternal happiness. Leonardo’s childhood was precisely as remarkable as this picture. He had two mothers.” Freud goes on to discern the shape of a vulture lying sideways in the picture composition, but since he got the name of the bird wrong it seems to reflect Freud’s fantasy more than Leonardo’s.9

Underneath the feet and elegant toes of Saint Anne we can see, as in the Louvre version of Virgin of the Rocks, how Leonardo’s studies of geology informed his paintings. In one of his notebooks, he described what is now known as “graded bedding” in layers of sedimentary rock: “Each layer is composed of heavier and lighter parts, the lowest being the heaviest. And the reason for this is that these layers are formed by the sediments from the waters discharged into the sea by the current of the rivers that flow into it. The heaviest part of this sediment was the part that was discharged first in the sequence.”10 The stratified rock formations and perfectly variegated pebbles beneath Saint Anne’s feet portray this phenomenon accurately.

Leonardo had also been wrestling with the question of why the sky appears blue, and around that time he had correctly concluded that it had to do with the water vapor in the air. In the Saint Anne painting, he portrays the sky’s luminous and misty gradations of blue as no other painter had done. The recent cleaning of the painting fully reveals the magical realism, veiled in vapors, of his distant mountains and skyline.

Most significant, the painting conveys the paramount theme in Leonardo’s art: the spiritual connection and analogy between the earth and humans. Echoing so many of his paintings—Ginevra de’ Benci, Virgin of the Rocks, Madonna of the Yarnwinder, and of course the Mona Lisa—a river curls from the distant horizon of the macrocosm of the earth and seems to flow into the veins of the Holy Family, ending with the lamb that foreshadows the Passion. The curving flow of the river connects to the flowing composition of the characters.

As Vespucci’s marginal note informs us, Leonardo had completed the central part of the painting by 1503. But he never delivered it to the church of Santissima Annunziata. Instead, he carried it with him for the rest of his life, making improvements on it for more than a decade. During those years, his assistants and students made copies based on the work in progress and on Leonardo’s sketches. Some are actually more finished than the painting Leonardo left us, and they allow us to see various details, such as jeweled sandals on the feet of Saint Anne and ornate embroidery on her clothes, that Leonardo was considering or had sketched but never got around to painting.11

The Saint Anne is the most complex and layered of Leonardo’s panel paintings, and many see it as a masterpiece on a par with the Mona Lisa, perhaps even surpassing it because it is more complex in its composition and motion. “We are always discovering new felicities of movement and harmony, growing more and more intricate, yet subordinate to the whole,” wrote Kenneth Clark, “and, as with Bach, this is not only an intellectual performance; it is charged with human feeling.”12

Perhaps. The painting’s grandeur, brilliant color, and narrative movement are wondrous to behold. But a few elements of the masterpiece make it less than perfectly satisfying, at least to me. There is a slight artificiality in the poses. The bodies seem to swivel unnaturally, with the Virgin Mary awkwardly draped onto her mother’s lap. Saint Anne’s jutting left arm seems uncomfortably cocked, and Mary’s sunlit right shoulder is too broad and prominent. As I stand before the brightly restored painting in the Louvre, I find myself respecting and admiring it, but not being mesmerized the way I am by the two nearby masterpieces, Saint John the Baptist and the Mona Lisa. There’s a profound beauty to the picture, but Leonardo at his best also produces emotional connections tinged with mystery. In the Saint Anne, the eyes of the characters do not seem to be windows into their souls; their smiles do not linger with us, hinting at elusive emotions.

Then something interesting happens. I go back to London to see the Burlington House cartoon again in the soft-lit grotto where it is kept in the National Gallery. Even without the misty blue mountains and watery landscape, it has elements that, to me at least, are more interesting. In it, Saint Anne’s left arm is not unnaturally cocked but instead her sketched hand points to heaven, Leonardo’s quintessential and exhilarating gesture. After a few experimental lines, he has succeeded in rendering the Virgin’s right shoulder masterfully. As Saint Anne glances lovingly yet quizzically at the Virgin, who is in turn glancing lovingly but warily at her child, there seems to be a greater depth of emotion than in the final painting.

So maybe there was another reason Leonardo decided not to finish some of his works. The unpainted renderings of the Adoration of the Magi and the Burlington House Saint Anne cartoon both have an unfinished perfection to them. For most people, “unfinished perfection” would seem to be a contradiction in terms, but sometimes it suits Leonardo. Among other things, he was the master of the unfinished. Vespucci was correct when he said that Leonardo was the new Apelles in that regard.





