CHAPTER 29




* * *





Rome



VILLA MELZI


The ongoing hostilities involving the French and their shifting alliances with Italian city-states often resembled pageantry and processionals more than war. “A march through Italy was an occasion for feasts, spectacles, firework displays, jousts, the expropriation of estates, and occasional massacres,” wrote Robert Payne. “The French aristocracy acquired new titles, new experiences, new mistresses, new diseases.”1

In the latest episode, the French in 1512 were losing their grip on Milan, which they had held since expelling Duke Ludovico Sforza thirteen years earlier. By the end of the year, his son Maximilian (Massimiliano) Sforza would retake the city, holding it for three years.

Leonardo had the ability to float above such political disruptions, usually by leaving town, though he also tried to catch the currents that would bring him to powerful patrons of whatever stripe. As a young man in Florence, he had been a second-tier recipient of Medici patronage before moving to Milan and aligning himself with the Sforzas. When they were ousted by the French, Leonardo switched allegiances, then enlisted with Cesare Borgia, and finally found a reliable patron in Charles d’Amboise, the French governor of Milan. But after Charles died in 1511 and the Sforzas were poised to retake the dukedom, Leonardo decided to leave Milan. With no desire to move back to Florence, where both the Adoration of the Magi and the Battle of Anghiari loomed unfinished, he began a four-year period during which he wandered in search of new patronage, carrying with him some paintings that he had been slowly perfecting.

For most of 1512, he resided comfortably in the family home of his student and surrogate son, Francesco Melzi, who turned twenty-one that year. It was an odd familial menagerie: Francesco had been adopted as a ward by Leonardo, and they were staying with his biological father, Girolamo Melzi. Also there was the still-beloved Salai, now thirty-two. The home was a stately square villa on a bluff overlooking the Adda River nineteen miles from Milan, just far enough away that Leonardo could avoid being swirled into the vortex of the geopolitics there.

Leonardo got to pursue, in a leisurely and broad fashion, all of his curiosities and passions at the Melzi villa. Though he no longer had access to human corpses, he dissected animals, including the rib cages of oxen and still-beating hearts of pigs. He completed his geology writings in the Codex Leicester, analyzing the nearby rock formations and eddies of the Adda. “Flux and reflux of water as demonstrated at the mill of Vaprio,” he captioned one sheet. He also offered the Melzi family some architectural suggestions. In his notebooks he drew ground plans of the estate and possible cupolas to be built, and on a page containing anatomical sketches, he added a sketch of the villa and a note about a tower room that likely was his study. He did not, however, use the time to collate his geography, anatomy, flight, or hydraulics studies into publishable treatises. He was still Leonardo, always pursuing a curiosity, less passionate about tying up loose ends.2





PORTRAITS OF LEONARDO


While at Villa Melzi, surrounded by the closest thing he had to a family, Leonardo turned sixty. What did he look like? How had his handsome face and flowing curls responded to age? A few portraits and possible portraits of Leonardo exist from this period. What they have in common is that they tend to make him look old, perhaps prematurely old, and they treat him as an iconic venerable sage, beard flowing and brows furrowed.

There is one tantalizing sketch that was drawn by Leonardo himself (fig. 118).3 The hatchings are left-handed, the notes are in mirror script, and the architectural studies on the verso side are of Villa Melzi, so we know he drew it around 1512. It shows an old man with a walking stick sitting on a rock, his left hand held up to his head as if in contemplation or perhaps feeling melancholy. His balding hair is wispy on top, though still curly. His beard flows down almost to his chest. His eye stares alertly, though with signs of fatigue. His lips are turned down—as is the case with most other possible Leonardo portraits—and his nose is distinguished and hooked, like those of his oft-doodled nutcracker man.

Fig. 118. Old man and studies of moving water.



The melancholy man seems to be staring across the page at one of Leonardo’s many drawings of swirling water forming turbulent eddies that look like curls. Indeed, it is in the note at the bottom of this sheet where Leonardo makes his comparison between water eddies and curls of hair. But this image of the aging artist contemplating the vortexes of water may be more figurative than real; the folio page is folded, and the drawing of the man may have been done separately from that of the turbulent water. As always there is a bit of mystery with Leonardo. Is he imagining himself ruefully contemplating flowing water? Is the connection across the folded sheet subconscious, or is it mere coincidence?

And is Leonardo, consciously or not, sketching himself? The man in the drawing looks older than sixty, but maybe that is how Leonardo actually looked at sixty. Many of the possible portraits make him look older than his age at the time, so it’s likely that he had prematurely aged into a bearded sage. Or maybe that is how he imagined he looked. As Kenneth Clark wrote, “Even if this is not strictly a self-portrait, we may call it a self-caricature, using the word to mean a simplified expression of essential character.”4

Leonardo’s contemplative sketch bears some resemblance to a profile portrait we can be pretty confident depicts him: a red-chalk drawing usually attributed to Melzi, probably done sometime between 1512 and 1518, and labeled “Leonardo Vinci” in capital letters (fig. 119).5 The similarities are tantalizing: Melzi’s portrait shows a still-handsome Leonardo with wavy hair tumbling to his shoulders, a bushy beard almost to his chest, and a distinguished nose that is pointed though not quite as hooked as a nutcracker caricature. The forehead looks similar, as does the eye. Most comparable is the overall iconography of the distinguished aging sage with flowing hair and beard.

If indeed both Melzi’s red-chalk drawing and Leonardo’s notebook sketch of an old man are portraits of Leonardo, then master and pupil have portrayed him in different ways. Leonardo made his subject look older, as perhaps he envisioned himself becoming. Melzi, on the other hand, made his subject look younger, still vibrant and barely wrinkled, his face and gaze strong, as he no doubt liked to remember him.

Fig. 119. Melzi’s drawing of Leonardo.



Over the years, Leonardo was often depicted as an iconic bearded philosopher, which was probably based both on reality and on some mythmaking. A prime example of this is a Vatican fresco by Raphael, the Italian artist who was Leonardo’s young follower. His School of Athens, painted around the time that Leonardo was turning sixty, depicts two dozen ancient philosophers standing in discourse. At the center is Plato, striding alongside Aristotle (fig. 120). Raphael used his contemporaries as models for most of the philosophers, and Plato looks to be a depiction of Leonardo. He wears a rose-colored toga, matching the colorful tunics that Leonardo famously sported. As in the Melzi portrait and others of Leonardo, Plato is balding, with wisps of curly hair on top and curls flowing in waves from the side of his head to his shoulder. There is also the curly beard, coming down to the top of his chest. And he is making a gesture characteristic of Leonardo: his right index finger is pointing up to the heavens.6

Fig. 120. Raphael’s pointing Plato, possibly based on Leonardo.



Another probable portrait of Leonardo, likely by one of his students, is sketched faintly on a page of horse drawings that Leonardo had done in his notebook (fig. 121).7 We can tell from the left-handed hatching and beautiful modeling that Leonardo did the horse legs on the other side of the sheet, but the faint sketch of a man is done with right-hand hatching in a different style. His beard is wavy, and he seems to be wearing a cap. Sweetly, there is a fainter portrait just below of a very young man with a similar cap and curly hair, perhaps the student himself.

Fig. 121. A student sketch possibly of Leonardo.



A cap is a feature found in many sixteenth-century portraits of Leonardo done after his death, such as the woodcut used to illustrate Vasari’s lives in the 1560s (fig. 122). Another disputed example, discovered in 2008 and known as the Lucan portrait (fig. 123), shows the subject in three-quarter profile with a cloth hat that has long been associated with him. It seems to be the model for, or based on, many similar paintings and engravings of a man with a hat and flowing beard, usually identified as Leonardo, such as a famous one in Florence’s Uffizi Museum (fig. 124), which appears on the cover of this book.

Fig. 122. Portrait of Leonardo in Vasari’s book.



Fig. 123. The Lucan portrait.



Fig. 124. Portrait in the Uffizi.



The most glorious and famous of all the possible portraits is a haunting red-chalk drawing done by Leonardo himself with his left-handed hatching. The Turin portrait (fig. 125), so called because of where it resides, has been reproduced so often that it defines our image of Leonardo, whether or not it is truly a self-portrait. It shows an old man with flowing beard, waves of curly hair, and bushy eyebrows. Crisp lines of hair are juxtaposed with the sfumato softness of the cheeks. The nose, subtly shaded and modeled with curved and straight hatch lines, is distinctively hooked, though not as pronounced as in Leonardo’s nutcracker-man sketches. Like many Leonardo works, the face displays different mingled emotions each time you look at it: strength and vulnerability, resignation and impatience, fatalism and resolve. The tired eyes are contemplative, the down-turned lips are melancholy.

Fig. 125. The Turin portrait.



Oddly, the eyes do not look at us but downward and to the left. Leonardo was experimenting with mirrors at the time, and he built some that connected at angles, resembling the three flapped mirrors that can be found on a modern medicine cabinet; he even devised an octagonal enclosure of mirrors that a person could stand in. So perhaps he made the drawing while in his studio using hinged mirrors to view himself obliquely. With its averted gaze, the Turin portrait echoes a recently discovered faint sketch by Leonardo, another possible self-portrait, that was largely obscured and covered by notes in his Codex on the Flight of Birds (fig. 126).8

Fig. 126. Possible self-portrait in notebook.



But is the Turin drawing really a self-portrait? Like Leonardo’s notebook drawing of an old man seeming to gaze at torrents of water, the man in the Turin portrait looks older than sixty. The hair has receded more, the eyebrows are bushier, and the mustache is sparser than in the portrait drawn by Melzi. Did Leonardo by then actually look older than his age? There is evidence that he did; a traveler who later visited him in France reported his age as ten years older than he really was at the time. Or did Leonardo, when being self-reflective, tend to portray himself as he envisioned he might become? Perhaps it is an extension of his nutcracker-man doodles and drawings of grotesques. Then again, maybe Leonardo is portraying in the Turin drawing someone else, such as his father or uncle, who both lived to around eighty.9

If we consider the Turin portrait in conjunction with the various other possible portraits and self-portraits, including the likely ones by Raphael and Melzi, we can see a pattern that probably approximates reality. Taken together, these drawings and paintings circumscribe the image of Leonardo as an iconic bearded genius and noble Renaissance seeker: intense yet also distracted, passionate yet also melancholy. In this he fits the description offered by his near contemporary, the sixteenth-century Italian painter and art writer Gian Paolo Lomazzo: “He had long hair and such long eyelashes and beard that he seemed to embody the true nobility of learning, like the druid Hermes and ancient Prometheus did in the past.”10





TO ROME


Leonardo was always on the lookout for powerful patrons, and in 1513, with Milan still controlled by his former patrons the Sforzas, a new one appeared in Rome. In March of that year, Giovanni de’ Medici was elected to become Pope Leo X. The son of Lorenzo “the Magnificent” de’ Medici, the Florentine ruler who was a halfhearted patron to Leonardo and sent him off to Milan as a young man, Giovanni was the last non-priest to maneuver himself into the papacy. Much of his time was spent tending to the Vatican’s uncertain alliance with France, which was again aiming to retake Milan and was making pacts with various other Italian cities. The new pope would also later face the threat of Martin Luther and his Reformation. But in 1513 he had time to be a profligate arts patron and indulge his love of theater, music, verse, and art. “Let us enjoy the papacy since God has given it to us,” he said, and he did so with gusto.

In his free-spending support of the arts, Pope Leo was aided by his brother Giuliano, who moved from Florence to Rome and established an intellectual court. A lover of both art and science, he was an ideal patron for Leonardo, whom he courted and offered a stipend; Leonardo, tired of having to support himself by completing commissions, accepted. For a few years, the two sons of Lorenzo “the Magnificent” would make up for their father’s relative indifference toward him.11

“I left Milan for Rome on 24 September 1513, in the company of Giovan, Francesco de Melzi, Salai, Lorenzo and Il Fanfoia,” Leonardo recorded on the opening page of a new notebook. Melzi was then twenty-two; Salai was thirty-three. He also recorded that he had paid to ship five hundred pounds of personal belongings from Milan to Rome. The trove included more than a hundred books, his growing but unsorted assortment of notebooks, anatomical drawings, scientific instruments, art equipment, clothes, and furniture. Most important, it included five or six paintings that he was still obsessing over, trying to perfect.12

As he traveled across the mountains, Leonardo looked for fossils. “I found some shells in the rocks of the high Apennines and mostly at the rock of La Verna,” he recorded.13 Once on the other side, he made a brief stop in Florence and checked on some relatives. He made a note to inquire “whether Alessandro Amadori, the priest, is alive or not,” referring to the brother of his stepmother, Albiera.14 He was. But the city of his early years held little allure for Leonardo, even though it was back under Medici control. It had too many ghosts.

Rome was a new city for him, a place he had never lived. It was teeming with great architects, including his friend Donato Bramante, who was modernizing vast swatches of roads and buildings. Among his other projects, Bramante was building a formal, terraced courtyard, flanked by arched corridors, that would connect the Vatican to the elegant papal summer palace, the Villa Belvedere. The villa, built less than thirty years earlier, caught the summer breezes on high ground overlooking Rome. It had been designed by Antonio del Pollaiuolo, whom Leonardo knew well from Florence.

In this villa, which housed favorites of Pope Leo and Giuliano, Leonardo was given his living quarters. It was the perfect place for him. Slightly aloof and secluded, but containing a court of artists and scientists, the Belvedere and its grounds encompassed a mix of great architecture and natural wonders, including a menagerie, a botanical garden, orchards, a fish pond, and classical sculptures collected by the recent popes, such as Laocoön and His Sons and the Apollo Belvedere.

To make matters even better, the pope ordered one of his architects to modernize quarters in the Villa Belvedere “for the rooms of Master Leonardo da Vinci.” The work included the widening of a window and the addition of wooden partitions, a chest for grinding colors, and four dining tables—an indication that Leonardo supported a large household of assistants and students.15

In the Belvedere gardens was a sanctuary containing rare plants from different parts of the world. Leonardo studied how a wide variety of leaves grew in spiral arrangements, known as phyllotactic spirals, as they sought to maximize exposure to the sun and rain. The gardens were also a stage for the pranks that he loved. One day a vine keeper in the garden showed him a strange lizard. “Leonardo made some wings of the scales of other lizards and fastened them on its back with a mixture of quicksilver, so that they trembled when it walked,” Vasari wrote. “Having made for it eyes, horns, and a beard, he tamed it and kept it in a box, but all his friends to whom he showed it used to run away from fear.” Another trick was making animals out of wax and blowing air into them so they would fly, a parlor trick that amused the pope.

Leonardo’s relationships with his half-brothers had improved since the resolution of the family’s inheritance disputes, and when he got to Rome he sought out his father’s oldest legitimate son, Giuliano da Vinci, who, not surprisingly, was a notary. Giuliano had been promised a benefice—a Church appointment that came with a stipend—but there had been a glitch, and Leonardo offered to intercede on his behalf. He personally went to check the registry, and finding that the appointment was not yet in the works he asked for help from the datary, the officer in charge of papal benefices. There ensued a discussion about costs and difficulties, apparently a solicitation for a bribe. However the case got settled, Giuliano’s wife seemed pleased. In a letter she wrote to her husband, she appended a postscript: “I forgot to ask you to remember me to your brother Lionardo, a most excellent and singular man [vuomo eccellentissimo e singhularissimo].”16 Giuliano gave the letter to Leonardo, who kept it among his papers for the rest of his life.

Leonardo’s conflicted feelings about fathers, sons, and family ties were expressed with a dash of wry humor when another of his half-brothers, Domenico, celebrated the birth of a son. The letter Leonardo sent him is suffused with irony and feigned condolences that may have been only half-joking. “My beloved brother,” he wrote. “A short time ago I received a letter from you saying that you have an heir, which I understand has afforded you a great deal of pleasure. Insofar as I had judged you to be prudent, I am now entirely convinced that I am as far removed from having accurate judgment as you are from prudence; seeing that you have been congratulating yourself on having created a watchful enemy, who will strive with all his energies seeking liberty, which can only come into being at your death.”17

Even though the pope and his brother were liberally commissioning works of art, including from Raphael and Michelangelo, Leonardo had not regained his desire to be a painter. It must have been a test of his impressive stubbornness not to be prodded into painting while being pampered by patrons who were so hungry for art. Baldassare Castiglione, an author and courtier who knew Leonardo in Rome, described him as one “of the world’s finest painters, who despises the art for which he has so rare a talent and has set himself to learn philosophy [meaning the sciences].”18 He received one commission from the pope but apparently did not finish it. As Leonardo lingered over the process of distilling the varnish he planned to use to coat the painting when it was complete, the pope complained, “Alas, this man will never get anything done, for he is thinking about the end before he begins.”19

Other than that, Leonardo seems to have received no new commission or started any new artwork. His only encounters with the brush involved perfecting, in a slow and studied manner, paintings he had long been working on and resisted relinquishing.

Leonardo instead was still more interested in science and engineering. He accepted the job of devising a way to drain the Pontine Marshes, fifty miles southeast of Rome, for Giuliano de’ Medici, who had been assigned the task of reclaiming the land by his brother. Leonardo visited the area and drew one of his subtly colored aerial maps, the lettering done by Melzi, which shows plans for the creation of two new canals that would drain the mountain streams into the sea before they reached the marshes.20 He also devised for Giuliano a mill for minting coins with good edges.

Leonardo’s most intense technology interest while in Rome involved mirrors. Ever since he was nineteen and part of Verrocchio’s team that soldered a copper ball and placed it on top of the dome of Florence’s cathedral, Leonardo had been fascinated by ways to make concave mirrors that would concentrate light from the sun to produce heat. During his career, he made close to two hundred drawings of ways to focus light and construct such mirrors, calculated the math of how light rays reflect from a curved surface, and studied the technology of using grinding stones to shape and polish metal.21 One of his drawings from the late 1470s in Florence (fig. 127) shows designs for a furnace, a mechanism to grind a mold, a press using the mold to shape a piece of metal, and a geometric drawing of curved shapes inside a cone.22 Another shows a machine that turns a large metal bowl and raises it to press up against a curved grindstone, with accompanying text on how “to make a concave sphere to throw fire.”23

Over the years, Leonardo became increasingly interested in the mathematics involved in focusing a mirror, drawing scores of diagrams of light rays from different directions hitting a curved surface and showing the angles at which they would be reflected. He tackled the problem identified by Ptolemy in AD 150 and studied by the eleventh-century Arab mathematician Alhazen of finding the point on a concave mirror where light coming from a certain source will be reflected to a designated spot (akin to finding the spot on the edge of a circular billiard table where you have to hit a cue ball so that it will bounce and hit your target). Leonardo failed to solve this using pure math. So in a series of drawings, he made a device that could solve the problem mechanically. He was better at using visualizations than equations.

Fig. 127. Machine for making mirrors.



During his time in Rome, he filled at least twenty more pages with ideas about the mathematics and construction techniques of concave mirrors, especially very large ones.24 Part of his interest by then was related to his astronomy studies; he was seeking ways to better observe the moon. But primarily he was still interested in using mirrors to focus sunlight into heat. He continued to think of himself as a military engineer, and the mirrors could serve as a weapon, as Archimedes had reportedly done against the Roman ships besieging Syracuse. They could also be useful for soldering metals and for powering large boilers. “With this one can supply heat for any boiler in a dyeing factory,” he wrote. “And with this a pool can be warmed up, because there will be always boiling water.”25

Living with Leonardo at the Belvedere was a German assistant who was supposed to be helping him construct his mirrors and produce some for the wardrobe rooms of the pope and Giuliano. But he was disloyal, lazy, and erratic, causing Leonardo to go into a tailspin of rage. He became physically ill as well as petulant, and his psychological unhinging was splayed out in three long drafts of complaining letters intended for Giuliano.

This was not the first time that Leonardo’s bouts of torment seemed to spiral out of control. Back when he was in Milan, he had walked off the job of decorating rooms for the duke, drafted a fiery letter of complaint, and then torn it in half. But the letters he drafted for Giuliano were of a different order of megatonnage. He told the stories of his clashes with the German in lengthy and disjointed diatribes that verged on the paranoid and were cluttered with details and digressions that would likely have baffled Giuliano. He wrote of “the wickedness of that German deceiver” and of how the boy betrayed him by building his own workshop so he could do jobs for other people. Leonardo also denounced him for wasting his days bird-hunting with the Swiss guards. This is not the sweet Leonardo we usually see, tending to young acolytes and twinkling fondly at the transgressions of the rascally Salai.

Leonardo’s other nemesis was another German staying at the Belvedere, a rival mirror-maker named Giovanni. Leonardo wrote in a draft letter, “That German, Giovanni the mirror-maker, was in the workshop every day, wanting to see everything that I was doing and then broadcasting it around, and criticizing whatever he could not understand.” He accused Giovanni of being jealous, then rambled on semicoherently about how Giovanni had turned the young assistant against him.26

During this time, Leonardo continued his anatomical studies, dissecting at least three corpses in Rome, probably at the Hospital of the Holy Spirit (Santo Spirito), and refining his drawings of the human heart. Dissections were not illegal, but Leonardo was stopped from continuing with them. “The pope has found out that I have skinned three corpses,” he wrote, and he blamed it on the jealous Giovanni. “This person has hindered me in anatomy, denouncing it before the Pope and also at the hospital.”27

Leonardo’s foul mood and his lack of artistic productivity, in stark contrast to Michelangelo and Raphael at the time, served to alienate him from the Medici orbit. The situation worsened when Giuliano’s influence declined; he was sent off in early 1515 to marry the daughter of a French duke and then died a year later after a long bout with tuberculosis. It was time for Leonardo to move on once again.

He found a new opportunity when he was invited to be part of Pope Leo’s entourage to Florence and Bologna. The Medici pope triumphantly entered his native Florence in November 1515. One observer reported, “All the chief citizens went in procession to meet him and among others about fifty youths, only the richest and foremost, dressed in a livery of clothing of purple cloth with fur collars, going on foot, and each with a type of small, silvered lance in his hands—a most beautiful thing.” Leonardo drew in his notebook the temporary arch that had been built for the procession. When the pope arrived at the Council Hall for a gathering of cardinals, the remnants of Leonardo’s unfinished Battle of Anghiari was still visible on the wall.

In Florence the pope also convened a gaggle of top artists and architects to discuss renewing Florence the way Bramante was Rome. Leonardo made drawings of his ideas for completely reworking and expanding the plaza in the Medici quarters and demolishing the houses in front of the church of San Lorenzo, which would have destroyed many of the streets and alleys of his younger days, and drew the Medici Palace with a new façade that faced the new grand plaza.28

But Leonardo did not stay in Florence. Instead, he followed the papal procession to Bologna, where the pope had scheduled a secret parley with the new king of France, Francis I, who had just turned twenty-one. Francis had wrested control of Milan from the Sforzas in September 1515, which convinced the pope he had to make peace with him.

The parley did not settle the French-Italian wars, but it would eventually result in finding Leonardo a new patron. He was at the meetings between the pope and the king, and at one session he made a black-pencil sketch of Artus Gouffier, the king’s tutor and chamber master. It is likely that, in Bologna, the king first tried to entice Leonardo to come to France.





