CHAPTER 11




* * *





Birds and Flight



THEATRICAL FLIGHTS OF FANCY


“Study the anatomy of the wings of a bird together with the breast muscles that move those wings,” Leonardo wrote in his notebook. “Do the same for man to show the possibility that man could sustain himself in the air by the flapping of wings.”1

For more than two decades, beginning around 1490, Leonardo investigated, with an unusual degree of diligence, the flight of birds and the possibility of designing machines that would enable humans to fly. He produced more than five hundred drawings and thirty-five thousand words scattered over a dozen notebooks on these topics. The endeavor wove together his curiosity about nature, his observational skills, and his engineering instincts. It was also an example of his method of using analogy to discover nature’s patterns. But in this case the analogy process extended even further: it took him closer than most of his other investigations into the realm of pure theory, including fluid dynamics and the laws of motion.

Leonardo’s interest in flying machines began with his work on theatrical pageants. From his early days in Verrocchio’s workshop until his final days in France, he threw himself into such spectacles with enthusiasm. His mechanical birds were first used—and last used—as court amusements.2

It was at such pageants that he first saw ingenious devices for allowing actors to rise, descend, and float as if they were flying. Brunelleschi, his predecessor as an artist-engineer in Florence, was the “master of effects” at a dazzling production of an Annunciation in the 1430s, which was revived using the same machinery in 1471, when Leonardo was nineteen and working in Florence. Suspended from the rafters was a ring holding twelve boys dressed as angels. Contraptions made of large pulleys and hand winches kept everything moving and soaring. Mechanical devices allowed the gilt-winged angels, holding harps and flaming swords, to fly down from heaven and rescue the saved souls, while from below the stage the realm of hell shot forth devils. Gabriel then arrived for the Annunciation. “As the angel ascended amongst the voices of jubilation,” one spectator wrote, “he moved his hands up and down, and flapped his wings as if he were truly flying.”

Another play performed at the time, The Ascension, also featured flying characters. “The sky opened and the Heavenly Father appeared, miraculously suspended in air,” according to a report, “and the actor playing Jesus seems to have truly ascended on his own, and without tottering reached a great height.” Christ’s ascension was accompanied by a group of winged angels, who had been suspended in the make-believe clouds above the stage.3

Leonardo’s first studies of flight were for such theatrical extravaganzas. One set of drawings that he made just before he left Florence for Milan in 1482 shows bat-like wings, with cranks that would create motion but not actual flight, connected to what appear to be theatrical mechanisms.4 Another shows a featherless wing connected to gears, pulleys, cranks, and cables: the configuration of the crank and the size of the gears indicate that the whole system is designed for the theater and not for an actual flying machine. But even for his theater designs, he was carefully observing nature. On the back of this sheet he drew a jagged downward line with the caption “This is the manner in which birds descend.”5

There is one other clue that these drawings from his Florence days were meant for the theater rather than actual flight: in all of the ingenious military devices he says he can build in his job application letter to Ludovico Sforza, there is no boast about being able to make machines for human flight. It was only after he got to Milan that his attention turned from theatrical fantasy to real-world engineering.





BIRD-WATCHING


Here’s a test. All of us have looked at birds in flight, but have you ever stopped to look closely enough to see whether a bird moves its wing upward at the same speed as it flaps it down? Leonardo did, and he was able to observe that the answer differs based on species. “There are some birds that move their wings more swiftly when they lower them than when they raise them, and this is the case with doves and such birds,” he recorded in a notebook. “There are others which lower their wings more slowly than they raise them, and this is seen with crows and similar birds.” And some, such as magpies, raise and lower at the same speed.6

Leonardo had a strategy he used to refine his observational skills. He would write down marching orders to himself, determining how he would sequence his observations in a methodical step-by-step way. “First define the motion of the wind and then describe how the birds steer through it with only the simple balancing of the wings and tail,” he wrote in one example. “Do this after the description of their anatomy.”7

He recorded in his notebooks scores of such observations, most of which we find amazing mainly because we never make the effort, in our daily lives, to observe ordinary phenomena so closely. On a trip to the vineyard he had been given by Ludovico in Fiesole, a village just north of Florence, he watched a chukar partridge take flight. “When a bird with a wide wingspan and a short tail wants to take off,” he reported, “it will lift its wings with force and turn them to receive the wind beneath them.”8 From observations like that he was able to make a generalization about the relationship between a bird’s tail and its wings: “Birds with short tails have very wide wings, which by their width take the place of the tail; and they make considerable use of the helms set on the shoulders when they wish to turn.” And later: “When birds are descending near the ground and the head is below the tail, they lower the tail, which is spread wide open, and take short strokes with the wings; consequently, the head is raised above the tail, and the speed is checked so that the bird can alight on the ground without a shock.”9 Ever notice all that?

After twenty years of observing, he decided to compile his notes into a treatise. Much of the work was gathered into an eighteen-folio notebook, now known as the Codex on the Flight of Birds.10 It begins by exploring the concepts of gravity and density, and it ends by envisioning the launch of a flying machine he had designed and comparing its components with the body parts of a bird. But like much of Leonardo’s work, the treatise remained unfinished. He was more interested in nailing concepts than he was in polishing them for publication.

When he was compiling his bird treatise, Leonardo began a section of another notebook with a directive to put them into a broader context. “To explain the science of the flight of birds, it is necessary to explain the science of the winds, which we shall prove by the motion of the waters,” he wrote. “The understanding of this science of water will serve as a ladder to arrive at the knowledge of things flying in the air.”11 He not only got the basic principles of fluid dynamics correct, but he was able to turn his insights into rudimentary theories that foreshadowed those of Newton, Galileo, and Bernoulli.

No scientist before Leonardo had methodically shown how birds stay aloft. Most had simply embellished on Aristotle, who mistakenly thought that birds were supported by air the way ships were by water.12 Leonardo realized that keeping aloft in air requires fundamentally different dynamics than doing so in water, because birds are heavier than air and are thus subject to being pulled down by gravity. The first two folios of his Codex on the Flight of Birds deal with the laws of gravity, which he calls the “attraction of one object to another.” The force of gravity, he wrote, acts in the direction of “an imaginary line between the centers of each object.”13 He then described how to calculate the center of gravity of a bird, a pyramid, and other complex shapes.

One important observation he made ended up informing his studies of flight and of the flow of water. “Water cannot be compressed like air,” he wrote.14 In other words, a wing beating down on air will compact the air into a smaller space, and as a result the air pressure underneath the wing will be higher than the pressure of the rarefied air above it. “If the air could not be compressed, the birds would not be able to support themselves upon the air that is struck by their wings.”15 The downward flap of the wing pushes the bird higher and thrusts it forward.

He also realized that the pressure the bird puts on the air is met by an equal and opposite pressure that the air puts on the bird. “See how the wings, striking against the air, sustain the heavy eagle in the thin air on high,” he noted, then added, “As much force is exerted by the object against the air as by the air against the object.”16 Two hundred years later, Newton would state a refined version of this as his third law of motion: “To every action there is always opposed an equal reaction.”

Leonardo accompanied this concept with a precursor to Galileo’s principle of relativity: “The effect of moving air on a stationary object is as great as it is when the object is moving and the air is stationary.”17 In other words, the forces that would act upon a bird flying through air are the same as the forces acting on a bird that is stationary but has air rushing past it (such as a bird in a wind tunnel or one hovering on a windy day over a spot on the ground). He drew an analogy from his studies of water flow, which he had recorded earlier in the same notebook: “The action of a pole drawn through still water resembles that of running water against a stationary pole.”18

Even more presciently, he had an intimation of what became known, more than two hundred years later, as Bernoulli’s principle: when air (or any fluid) flows faster, it exerts less pressure. Leonardo drew a cross section of a bird’s wing, which shows that the top is curved more than the underside. (This is also true of airplane wings, which make use of this principle.) The air flowing over the curved top of the wing has farther to travel than the air flowing under the bottom. Therefore, the air on top has to travel faster. The difference in speed means that the air on the top of the wing exerts less pressure than the air on the bottom, thus helping the bird (or airplane) to stay aloft. “The air above birds is thinner than the usual thinness of the other air,” he wrote.19 Leonardo thus realized, before other scientists, that a bird stays aloft not merely because the wings beat downward against the air but also because the wings propel the bird forward and the air lessens in pressure as it rushes over the wing’s curved top surface.





FLYING MACHINES


Both his observations on anatomy and his analysis of the physics convinced Leonardo that it was possible to build a winged mechanism that would allow humans to fly. “A bird is an instrument working according to mathematical law, and it is in the capacity of man to reproduce such an instrument,” he wrote. “A man with wings large enough and duly attached might learn to overcome the resistance of the air and raise himself upon it.”20

Combining engineering with physics and anatomy, Leonardo began in the late 1480s to devise contraptions to accomplish this. His first design (fig. 50) looks like a big bowl with four oar-like blades that were to alternate in pairs moving up and down, like the four-winged dragonfly he had studied earlier. To overcome the relative weakness of human breast muscles, this cross between a flying saucer and a health club torture chamber has the operator use his legs to push pedals, his arms to crank a gear-and-pulley mechanism, his head to pump a piston, and his shoulders to pull cables. It is unclear how he would manage to steer the machine.21

Fig. 50. A human-powered flying machine.



Fig. 51. A wing with hinges.



Seven pages later in the same notebook, Leonardo produced an elegant drawing (fig. 51) of an experiment that used a bat-like wing, its thin bones covered with a membrane of skin rather than feathers, that was similar to those he had drawn for theatrical productions back in Florence. The wing is attached to a thick wooden plank, which, he specified, should weigh 150 pounds, like an average man, and to a lever mechanism that would pump the wing. Leonardo even drew an amusing man in motion, jumping up and down on top of the end of the long lever. A little sketch below shows a clever element: when the wing is swinging upward a hinge allows it to point its tips downward and encounter less resistance, then slowly be moved by a spring and pulley back into a rigid position.22 Later ideas included devising skin flaps in the wings that would be closed on the downswing but fly open on the upswing to minimize air resistance.

At times, Leonardo abandoned the hope of achieving self-propelled flight and designed gliders instead. One of these was shown to be basically workable in a reconstruction done five hundred years later by the ITN television network in Britain.23 However, for most of his career he remained committed to achieving human-powered flight in birdlike devices with flapping wings. He drew more than a dozen variations, using pedals and levers with the pilot prone or standing, and began referring to his machine as the uccello, or bird.

In his spacious accommodations at the Corte Vecchia, Leonardo had what he called “la mia fabrica” (my factory). In addition to being the room where he had worked on the ill-fated horse monument for the Sforzas, it provided space for experimenting with flying machines. At one point he wrote himself a note about how to conduct a flight experiment on the roof without being seen by the workers constructing a tower—the tiburio that he had failed in the competition to design—on the cathedral next door. “Make a large and tall model, and you will have a room on the upper roof,” he wrote. “If you stand on the roof at the side of the tower, the men at work upon the tiburio will not see you.”24

At other times, he envisioned testing a machine over water while wearing a life-preserver. “You will experiment with this machine over a lake and you will wear as a belt a long wineskin, so that if you fall in, you will not drown.”25 And finally, when all of his experiments were nearing an end, he mingled his plans with fantasies. “The large bird will take its first flight from the back of the great Swan,” he wrote on the last folio of his Codex on the Flight of Birds, referring to Swan Mountain (Monte Ceceri) near Fiesole, “filling the universe with amazement, filling all writings with its fame, and bringing eternal glory to the nest where it was born.”26

With beautiful little drawings, Leonardo portrayed the elegance of birds as they twisted, turned, shifted their center of gravity, and maneuvered the winds. He also pioneered the use of vector-like lines and swirls to show invisible currents. But for all the beauty of his art and all the ingenuity of his designs, he was never able to create a self-propelled human flying machine. To be fair, after five hundred years nobody else has either.

Late in his life, Leonardo sketched a cylinder with two feeble wings, clearly meant as a toy. Look closely, and you can see that it’s attached to a wire line. In what may be his last drawing of a mechanical bird, he reverted, in a poignant and slightly sad fashion, to the way he began drawing them thirty years earlier: as dazzling but ephemeral little contraptions for the momentary amusement of audiences at court theatricals and public pageants.27





