CHAPTER 13




* * *





Math



GEOMETRY


Leonardo increasingly came to realize that mathematics was the key to turning observations into theories. It was the language that nature used to write her laws. “There is no certainty in sciences where mathematics cannot be applied,” he declared.1 He was correct. Using geometry to understand the laws of perspective taught him how math could extract from nature the secrets of its beauty and reveal the beauty of its secrets.

With his visual acuity, Leonardo had a natural feel for geometry, and that branch of math helped him formulate some rules for how nature works. However, his facility with shapes was not matched by one for numbers, so arithmetic did not come naturally. In his notebooks are entries where, for example, he doubles 4,096 to get 8,092, forgetting to carry the 1.2 As for algebra—that wonderful tool for using numbers and letters to codify nature’s laws and variables, bequeathed to later Renaissance scholars by the Arabs and Persians—Leonardo was clueless, which hindered his ability to use equations as brushstrokes for painting the patterns he discerned in nature.

What Leonardo liked about geometry, as opposed to arithmetic, was that geometric shapes are continuous quantities, whereas numbers are discrete digits and thus discontinuous units. “Arithmetic deals with discontinuous quantities, geometry with continuous ones,” he wrote.3 In modern parlance we would say that he was more comfortable with analog tools, including the use of shapes as analogies (yes, that’s where the word analog comes from), rather than being a digital native. As he wrote, “Arithmetic is a computational science in its calculation, with true and perfect units, but it is of no avail in dealing with continuous quantity.”4

Geometry also had the advantage of being a visual endeavor. It engaged the eye and the imagination. “When he looked at the way that shells assumed a helical shape,” Martin Kemp wrote, “at how leaves and petals originated from stems, and at the reasons why a heart valve worked with perfect economy, geometrical analysis delivered the results he desired.”5

Not having access to algebra, he instead used geometry to describe the rate of change caused by a variable. For example, he used triangles and pyramids to represent rates of change in the velocity of falling objects, the volume of sounds, and the perspective view of distant objects. “Proportion is not only to be found in number and measure, but also in sounds, weights, times and places and every force that exists,” he wrote.6





LUCA PACIOLI


One of Leonardo’s close friends at Milan’s court was Luca Pacioli, a mathematician who developed the first widely published system for double-entry bookkeeping. Like Leonardo, he was born in Tuscany and attended only an abacus school, which provided a trade education in arithmetic but no Latin. He worked as a wandering tutor to boys from wealthy families and then became a Franciscan friar who never moved into a monastery. He wrote a math textbook in Italian, rather than Latin, which was published in Venice in 1494; it thus became part of the explosive spread of learning in vernacular languages triggered by the printing press in the late fifteenth century.

Leonardo bought a copy as soon as it was published, recording the rather high cost (more than twice what he paid for a Bible) in his notebook,7 and he may have helped recruit Pacioli to become part of the Milan court. The mathematician arrived there in about 1496 and had living quarters along with Leonardo at the Corte Vecchia. They shared a love of geometric shapes. A portrait painted of Pacioli (fig. 57) shows him and a student in front of a table with a protractor, compass, and stylus; a polyhedron of eighteen squares and eight triangles half filled with water dangles from the ceiling.

Fig. 57. Luca Pacioli.



A lesser-known but important component of Pacioli’s work at court involved contributing, alongside Leonardo, to its ephemeral amusements and performances. In a notebook he began just after his arrival, “On the Powers of Numbers,” Pacioli compiled riddles, mathematical brain-twisters, magic tricks, and parlor games designed to be presented and solved at court parties. His tricks include how to make an egg walk across a table (it involves wax and strands of hair), how to make a coin go up and down in a glass (vinegar and magnetic powder), and how to make a chicken jump (quicksilver). His parlor games included the first published version of the standard card trick of guessing which card someone has picked from a deck (it involves an accomplice), brain-teasers such as one in which a man has to figure out how to ferry a wolf and a goat and a cabbage across a river, and math games in which a spectator thinks of a number which can then be discovered by asking the result of a few operations performed on it. Particularly appealing to Leonardo were Pacioli’s games involving creating circles around triangles and squares using only a ruler and a compass.

Pacioli and Leonardo bonded over their shared fondness for such stimulating amusements and entertainments. Leonardo’s name crops up often in Pacioli’s notes. After writing the basics of one trick, for instance, Pacioli declares, “Well Leonardo, you can do more of this on your own.”8

More seriously, Leonardo learned math from Pacioli, a great tutor, who taught him the subtleties and beauties of Euclid’s geometry and tried to teach him, with less success, how to multiply squares and square roots. At times when he found a concept difficult to comprehend, Leonardo would copy passages of Pacioli’s explanations verbatim into his notebooks.9

Leonardo returned the favor by drawing a set of mathematical illustrations, of astonishing artistic beauty and grace, for the book Pacioli began writing upon his arrival in Milan, On Divine Proportion, which examines the role of proportions and ratios in architecture, art, anatomy, and math. Given Leonardo’s appreciation for the intersection of arts and sciences, he was fascinated by the topic.

Most of Leonardo’s drawings for Pacioli’s book, which was finished in 1498, are variations of the five shapes known as Platonic solids. These are polyhedrons that have the same number of faces meeting at each vertex: pyramids, cubes, octahedrons (eight faces), dodecahedrons (twelve), and icosahedrons (twenty). He also illustrated more complex shapes, such as a rhombicuboctahedron, which has twenty-six facets, eight of them equilateral triangles that are bordered by squares (fig. 58). He pioneered a new method for making such shapes understandable: instead of drawing them as solids, he made them see-through skeletons, as if constructed of wooden beams. His sixty illustrations for Pacioli were the only drawings he published during his lifetime.

Fig. 58. Leonardo’s rhombicuboctahedron for Pacioli’s book.



Part of Leonardo’s genius is in the lighting and shading of these illustrations, which make the geometric renderings seem like actual objects dangling before our eyes. The light comes in from an angle, casting shadows both bold and subtle. Each of the object’s faces becomes a windowpane. Leonardo’s mastery of perspective added to the three-dimensional look. He could envision the shapes in his head as real objects, then convey them on the page. But he probably also used actual wooden models that he hung on a string, like the dangling polyhedron in the portrait of Pacioli. Using both observation and mathematical reasoning, and combining his study of geometric shapes with his inquiries into the flight of birds, Leonardo became the first person to discover the center of gravity of a triangular pyramid (one-quarter of the way up a line from the base to the peak).

In his book, Pacioli gratefully acknowledged that the drawings were “made and formed by the ineffable left hand, so well versed in all the mathematical disciplines, by the prince among mortals today, by the first Florentine, our Leonardo da Vinci, who, in that happy time, together with me, on the same stipends, was in the marvelous city of Milan.” Pacioli later called Leonardo the “most worthy of painters, perspectivists, architects and musicians, one endowed with every perfection,” and he recalled “that happy time when we were both in the employ of the most illustrious Duke of Milan, Ludovico Maria Sforza Anglo, in the years of Our Lord 1496 to 1499.”10

Pacioli’s book focused on the golden ratio, or divine proportion, an irrational number that expresses a ratio that pops up often in number series, geometry, and art. It is approximately 1.61803398, but (being irrational) has decimals that stretch on randomly forever. The golden ratio occurs when you divide a line into two parts in such a way that the ratio between the whole length and the longer part is equal to the ratio between the longer part and the shorter part. For example, take a line that’s 100 inches long and divide it into two parts of 61.8 inches and 38.2 inches. That comes close to the golden ratio, because 100 divided by 61.8 is about the same as 61.8 divided by 38.2; in both cases, it’s approximately 1.618.

Euclid wrote about this ratio in around 300 BC, and it has fascinated mathematicians ever since. Pacioli was the first to popularize the name divine proportion for it. In his book by that title, he described the way it turns up in studies of geometric solids such as cubes and prisms and polyhedrons. In popular lore, including in Dan Brown’s The Da Vinci Code, the golden ratio is found throughout Leonardo’s art.11 If so, it is doubtful it was intentional. Although it is possible to draw diagrams of the Mona Lisa and Saint Jerome asserting this notion, the evidence that Leonardo consciously made use of the precise mathematical ratio is not convincing.

Nevertheless, Leonardo’s interest in harmonic ratios was reflected in his intense studies of the ways that ratios and proportions are manifest in anatomy, science, and art. It led him to search for analogies between the proportions of the body, the notes of musical harmonies, and other ratios that underpin the beauty manifest in the works of nature.





TRANSFORMATION OF SHAPES


As an artist, Leonardo was particularly interested in how the shapes of objects transformed when they moved. From his observations on the flow of water, he developed an appreciation for the idea of the conservation of volume: as a quantity of water flows, its shape changes, but its volume remains exactly the same.

Understanding the transformation of volumes was useful for an artist, especially one such as Leonardo, who specialized in portraying bodies in motion. It helped him picture how an object’s shape could be distorted or transformed while keeping its volume unchanged. “Of everything that moves,” he wrote, “the space which it acquires is as great as that which it leaves.”12 This applies not only to quantities of water, but to a bending arm and twisting torso of a human.

As he became more interested in how geometry could provide analogies for phenomena in nature, Leonardo began to explore more theoretical cases where the conservation of volume held true as one geometric shape morphed into another. An example would be if you took a square and transformed it into a circle with the exact same area. A three-dimensional example would be showing how a sphere could be transformed into a cube with the same volume.

By grappling with these transformations and persistently recording his insights, Leonardo helped to pioneer the field of topology, which looks at how shapes and objects can undergo transformations while keeping some of the same properties. Throughout his notebooks we can see him—sometimes with obsessive focus, at other times distracted and doodling—taking curved shapes and transforming them into rectangular shapes of the same size, or doing the same for pyramids and cones.13 He could visualize and draw such transformations, and he sometimes replicated them experimentally using soft wax. But he was not good at the math tools of geometry, which involve being able to multiply the squares of numbers, square roots, cubes, and cube roots. “Learn the multiplication of roots from Maestro Luca,” he wrote in his notebook, referring to Pacioli. But he never mastered the math and instead spent his career trying to figure out geometrical transformations using drawings rather than equations.14

He started collecting his studies on this topic and in 1505 declared his intention to write “a book entitled transformation, namely of one body into another without diminishing or increasing the material.”15 Like his other treatises, it produced brilliant notebook pages but not a published book.





SQUARING THE CIRCLE


One topic related to the conservation of volume that particularly intrigued Leonardo, and would eventually obsess him, came from the ancient Greek mathematician Hippocrates. It involves a lune, a geometric shape that looks like the crescent of a quarter-moon. Hippocrates discovered a delightful mathematical fact: if you create a lune by overlapping a large half-circle with a smaller one, you can construct a right triangle inside the larger half-circle that has the exact same area as the lune. This was the first way discovered to calculate the exact area inside a curved shape, such as a circle or a lune, and to replicate that area in a straight-sided shape, such as a triangle or rectangle.

That fascinated Leonardo. He filled his notebooks with shaded drawings in which he overlapped two half-circles and then created triangles and rectangles that had the same area as the resulting crescents. Year after year, he relentlessly pursued ways to create circular shapes with areas equivalent to triangles and rectangles, as if addicted to the game. Though he never gave the precise dates of any milestones he reached when making a painting, he treated these geometric studies as if each little success was a moment in history worthy of a notarial record. One night he wrote momentously, “Having for a long time searched to square the angle to two equal curves . . . now in the year 1509 on the eve of the Calends of May [April 30] I have found the solution at the 22nd hour on Sunday.”16

His pursuit of equivalent areas was aesthetic as well as intellectual. After a while, his experimental geometric shapes, such as his curved triangles, became artistic patterns. On one set of pages (fig. 59) he drew 180 diagrams of overlapping circular and straight-sided shapes, each one annotated with how the shaded and unshaded portions relate to each other in area.17

Fig. 59. Finding equivalent geometric areas.



As usual, he decided to put together a treatise on the topic—De Ludo Geometrico, he called it (On the Game of Geometry)—and it filled page after page of his notebooks. Not surprisingly, it joined his other treatises in never being finished for publication.18 His choice of the word ludo is interesting; it implies a diversion or pastime that is engrossing but like a game. Indeed, the distraction that came from playing with lunes seemed to drive him to lunacy at times. But to him it was an enthralling mind game, one that he believed would get him closer to the secrets of nature’s beautiful patterns.

These obsessions led Leonardo to an ancient riddle described by Vitruvius, Euripides, and others. Faced with a plague in the fifth century BC, the citizens of Delos consulted the oracle of Delphi. They were told that the plague would end if they found a mathematical way to precisely double the size of the altar to Apollo, which was shaped as a cube. When they doubled the length of each side, the plague worsened; the Oracle explained that by doing so they had increased the size of the cube eightfold rather than doubling it. (For example, a cube with two-foot sides has eight times the volume of a cube with one-foot sides.) To solve the problem geometrically required multiplying the length of each side by the cube root of 2.

Despite his note to himself to “learn the multiplication of roots from Maestro Luca,” Leonardo was never good at square roots, much less cube roots. Even if he had been, however, neither he nor the plague-stricken Greeks had the tools to solve the problem with numerical calculations, because the cube root of 2 is an irrational number. But Leonardo was able to come up with a visual solution. The answer can be found by drawing a cube that is constructed on a plane that cuts diagonally through the original cube, just as a square can be doubled in size by constructing a new square on a line cutting it in half diagonally, thus squaring the hypotenuse.19

Leonardo also wrestled with a related riddle, the most famous of the ancient math puzzles: squaring the circle. The challenge is to take a circle and, using only a compass and ruler, construct a square that has the exact same area. That quest was what led Hippocrates to work on ways to turn a circular shape into a triangular one with the same volume. For more than a decade, Leonardo became obsessed by the effort.

We now know that a mathematical process for squaring a circle requires use of a transcendental number, in this case π, which cannot be expressed as a fraction and is not the root of any polynomial with rational coefficients.20 So it’s not possible to accomplish with just a compass and ruler. But Leonardo’s persistent efforts show the brilliance of his thought process. At one point, exhausted but excited after an all-night effort, he scribbled one of the momentous entries he used for what he thought were mathematical breakthroughs: “On the night of St Andrew [November 30] I reached the end of squaring the circle; and at the end of the light of the candle, of the night, and of the paper on which I was writing, it was completed.”21 But it was a false celebration, and he was soon back at work on different methods.

One approach he took was to calculate the area of a circle experimentally. He sliced a circle into thin triangular wedges and tried to measure the size of each. He also unrolled the circumference to figure out its length. A more sophisticated approach came from his love of lunes. He cut a circle into many rectangles that could be easily measured and then used the methods of Hippocrates to find areas comparable to the remaining curved parts.

Yet another prolonged attempt involved dividing a circle into many sectors, which he then subdivided into triangles and semicircles. He arranged these slices into a rectangle and repeated the process with smaller and smaller slices, approaching the limit of infinitely small triangles. His impulses prefigured those that would lead to the development of calculus, but Leonardo did not have the skills that allowed Leibniz and Newton to devise this mathematical study of change two centuries later.

Throughout his life, Leonardo would remain enchanted by the transformation of shapes. The margins of his notebooks, and sometimes entire pages, would be filled with triangles inside semicircles inside squares inside circles as he played with tricks for turning one geometrical form into another with the same area or volume. He came up with 169 formulas for squaring a circular shape, and on one sheet drew so many examples that it looks like a page from a pattern book. Even the very last notebook page that he is known to have written near the end of his life—a famous one ending with the phrase “the soup is getting cold”—is filled with triangles and rectangles as he tried to calculate comparable areas.

Kenneth Clark once called them “calculations which are of no interest to mathematicians, and of even less interest to the art historian.”22 Yes, but they were interesting to Leonardo. Compulsively so. They may not have led to historic breakthroughs in mathematics, but they were integral to his ability to perceive and portray motion—of bird wings and water, of a squirming baby Jesus and a breast-beating Saint Jerome—like no other artist before him.





