CHAPTER 18




* * *





The Last Supper



THE COMMISSION


When Leonardo was painting The Last Supper (fig. 74), spectators would visit and sit quietly just so they could watch him work. The creation of art, like the discussion of science, had become at times a public event. According to the account of a priest, Leonardo would “come here in the early hours of the morning and mount the scaffolding,” and then “remain there brush in hand from sunrise to sunset, forgetting to eat or drink, painting continually.” On other days, however, nothing would be painted. “He would remain in front of it for one or two hours and contemplate it in solitude, examining and criticizing to himself the figures he had created.” Then there were dramatic days that combined his obsessiveness and his penchant for procrastination. As if caught by whim or passion, he would arrive suddenly in the middle of the day, “climb the scaffolding, seize a brush, apply a brush stroke or two to one of the figures, and suddenly depart.”1

Leonardo’s quirky work habits may have fascinated the public, but they eventually began to worry Ludovico Sforza. Upon the death of his nephew, he had become the official Duke of Milan in early 1494, and he set about enhancing his stature in a time-honored way, through art patronage and public commissions. He also wanted to create a holy mausoleum for himself and his family, choosing a small but elegant church and monastery in the heart of Milan, Santa Maria delle Grazie, which he had Leonardo’s friend Donato Bramante reconstruct. For the north wall of the new dining hall, or refectory, he had commissioned Leonardo to paint a Last Supper, one of the most popular scenes in religious art.

At first Leonardo’s procrastination led to amusing tales, such as the time the church prior became frustrated and complained to Ludovico. “He wanted him never to lay down his brush, as if he were a laborer hoeing the Prior’s garden,” Vasari wrote. When Leonardo was summoned by the duke, they ended up having a discussion of how creativity occurs. Sometimes it requires going slowly, pausing, even procrastinating. That allows ideas to marinate, Leonardo explained. Intuition needs nurturing. “Men of lofty genius sometimes accomplish the most when they work least,” he told the duke, “for their minds are occupied with their ideas and the perfection of their conceptions, to which they afterwards give form.”

Leonardo added that there were two heads left to paint: that of Christ and of Judas. He was having trouble finding a model for Judas, he said, but he would use the image of the prior if he insisted on continuing to hound him. “The Duke was moved to wondrous laughter, saying that Leonardo had a thousand reasons on his side,” Vasari wrote. “The poor prior was confounded and went back to worrying about his garden, leaving Leonardo in peace.”

The duke, however, eventually began to get impatient, especially after his wife, Beatrice, died in early 1497, at age twenty-two. Even though he had a series of mistresses, he was bereft; he had come to admire Beatrice and depend on her counsel. She was buried in Santa Maria delle Grazie, and the duke started dining once a week in its refectory. In June of that year, he instructed his secretary “to urge Leonardo the Florentine to finish the work already begun in the Refectory of Santa Maria delle Grazie so that he can then attend to the other wall of the Refectory; and make him sign the contract with his own hand to oblige him to finish within the time to be agreed upon.”2

It turned out to be worth the wait. The result is the most spellbinding narrative painting in history, displaying multiple elements of Leonardo’s brilliance. His ingenious composition shows his mastery of complex rules of natural and artificial perspective, but it also shows his flexibility at fudging those rules when necessary. His ability to convey motion is evident in the gestures of each of the apostles, and so is his famed ability to follow Alberti’s injunction to make movements of the soul—emotions—known through movements of the body. In the same way that he used sfumato to blur hard lines delineating objects, Leonardo blurred the preciseness of perspective and of instants in time.

By conveying ripples of motions and emotions, Leonardo was able not merely to capture a moment but to stage a drama, as if he were choreographing a theatrical performance. The Last Supper’s artificial staging, exaggerated movements, tricks of perspective, and theatricality of hand gestures demonstrate the influence of Leonardo’s work as a court impresario and producer.





A MOMENT IN MOTION


Leonardo’s painting depicts the reactions just after Jesus tells his assembled apostles, “One of you will betray me.”3 At first it looks like a freeze-frame moment, as if Leonardo had used the quickness of his eye, which could make a stop-action image of dragonfly wings, to frame-grab a specific instant. Even Kenneth Clark, who called The Last Supper “the keystone of European art,” was disconcerted by what he felt was a stationary snapshot of crafted gestures: “The movement is frozen . . . rather terrifying.”4

I think not. Look longer at the picture. It vibrates with Leonardo’s understanding that no moment is discrete, self-contained, frozen, delineated, just as no boundary in nature is sharply delineated. As with the river that Leonardo described, each moment is part of what just passed and what is about to come. This is one of the essences of Leonardo’s art: from the Adoration of the Magi to Lady with an Ermine to The Last Supper and the Mona Lisa, each moment is not distinct but instead contains connections to a narrative.

The drama begins the second after Jesus’ words have been spoken. His head is bowed in silence even as his hands are continuing their movement toward the bread. Like a stone thrown into a pond, his pronouncement causes ripples outward, spreading from him to the edges of the picture and creating a narrative reaction.

As Jesus’ words reverberate, subsequent moments from the gospel become part of the drama. The next verses in Matthew are “And they were exceedingly sorrowful, and each of them began to say to him, ‘Lord, is it I?’ ” And from John: “The disciples began to look at one another, perplexed as to which of them he meant.”5 Even as the three apostles on the far left are still reacting, the others are beginning to respond or ask each other questions.

In addition to portraying the motion contained in a moment, Leonardo was masterful at conveying moti dell’anima, motions of the soul. “A picture of human figures ought to be done in such a way as that the viewer may easily recognize, by means of their attitudes, the intentions of their minds,” he wrote. The Last Supper is the grandest and most vibrant example of this in the history of art.6

Leonardo’s primary method for showing the intentions of the mind was through gestures. Italy was then, as now, a nation of hand-gesture enthusiasts, and Leonardo in his notebooks recorded a variety of them. Here, for example, is his description of how to portray someone making an argument:

Let the speaker, with the fingers of the right hand, hold one finger of the left hand, having the two smaller ones closed; and his face alert and turned towards the people with mouth a little open, to look as though he spoke. If he is sitting, let him appear as though about to rise, with his head forward. If you represent him standing, make him lean slightly forward with body and head towards the people. These you must represent as silent and attentive, all looking at the orator’s face with gestures of admiration; and make some old men in astonishment at the things they hear, with the corners of their mouths pulled down and drawn in, their cheeks full of furrows, and their eyebrows raised, and wrinkling the forehead where they meet.7

He had learned how much could be communicated by gestures by watching Cristoforo de’ Predis, the deaf brother of his painting partners in Milan. Gestures were also important to the monks who ate in the Santa Maria delle Grazie dining hall because they were obliged to observe silence many hours of the day, including at most meals. In one of his pocket notebooks he carried as he walked around town, Leonardo wrote a description of a group of people at a table making gestures as they talked:

One who was drinking has left his glass in its position and turned his head towards the speaker. Another twists the fingers of his hands together and turns with a frown to his companion. Another with hands spread open showing the palm, shrugs his shoulders up to his ears and makes a grimace of astonishment. Another speaks into his neighbor’s ear and the listener turns to him to lend an ear, while he holds a knife in one hand and in the other the loaf half cut through by the knife; and in turning round another, who holds a knife, upsets with his hand a glass on the table. Another lays his hand on the table and is looking. Another blows his mouthful. Another leans forward to see the speaker shading his eyes with his hand.8

These read like stage directions, and in The Last Supper, which includes many of these gestures, we can see Leonardo choreographing the action.

The twelve apostles are clustered into groups of three. Starting on our left, we can sense the flow of time, as if the narrative moves from left to right. On the far left is the cluster of Bartholomew, James the Minor, and Andrew, all still showing the immediate reaction of surprise at Jesus’ announcement. Bartholomew, alert and tough, is in the process of leaping to his feet, “about to rise, his head forward,” as Leonardo wrote.

The second trio from the left is Judas, Peter, and John. Dark and ugly and hook-nosed, Judas clutches in his right hand the bag of silver he has been given for promising to betray Jesus, whose words he knows are directed at him. He rears back, knocking over a salt cellar (which is clearly visible in early copies but not the current painting) in a gesture that becomes notorious. He leans away from Jesus and is painted in shadow. Even as his body recoils and twists, his left hand reaches for the incriminating bread that he and Jesus will share. “He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish shall betray me,” Jesus says, according to Matthew. Or as in the gospel according to Mark, “Behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the table.”9

Peter is pugnacious and agitated, elbowing forward in indignation. “Who is it of whom he speaks?” he asks. He seems ready to take action. In his right hand is a long knife; he would, later that evening, slice off the ear of a servant of the high priest while trying to protect Jesus from the mob that came to arrest him.

By contrast, John is quiet, knowing that he is not suspect; he seems saddened by yet resigned to what he knows cannot be prevented. Traditionally, John is shown asleep or lying on Jesus’ breast. Leonardo shows him a few seconds later, after Jesus’ pronouncement, wilting sadly.

Dan Brown in his novel The Da Vinci Code, which draws on The Templar Revelation by Lynn Picknett and Clive Prince, wove a conspiracy theory that has as one piece of evidence the assertion that the effeminate-looking John is actually secretly meant to be Mary Magdalene, the faithful follower of Jesus. Although a wonderful plot twist for a rollicking novel, it is not supported by the facts. One character in the novel argues that the feminine look of the character was meant to be a clue because “Leonardo was skilled at painting the difference between the sexes.” But Ross King points out in a book on The Last Supper, “On the contrary: Leonardo was skilled at blurring the differences between the sexes.”10 His alluring androgynous figures begin with his angel in Verrocchio’s Baptism of Christ and continue through Saint John the Baptist, painted in his final years.

Jesus, sitting alone in the center of The Last Supper, his mouth still slightly open, has finished making his pronouncement. The expressions of the other figures are intense, almost exaggerated, as if they are players in a pageant. But Jesus’ expression is serene and resigned. He looks calm, not agitated. He is slightly larger than the apostles, although Leonardo cleverly disguised the fact that he has used this trick. The open window with the bright landscape beyond forms a natural halo. His blue cloak is painted with ultramarine, the most expensive of pigments. In his studies of optics, Leonardo had discovered that objects against a light background look larger than when against a dark background.

The trio to the right of Jesus includes Thomas, James the Greater, and Philip. Thomas raises his index finger with his hand turned inward in a pointing gesture closely associated with Leonardo. (It appears in many of his paintings, such as Saint John the Baptist, and Raphael used it in his depiction of Plato that is believed to be based on Leonardo.) Later he will be known as doubting Thomas because he demanded proof of Jesus’ resurrection, which Jesus provided by letting Thomas place a finger in his wounds. Preparatory drawings for Philip and James have survived; the former of them, very androgynous, appears to have also served as a model for the Virgin Mary in the London version of Virgin of the Rocks.

The final trio on the right comprises Matthew, Thaddeus, and Simon. They are already in a heated discussion about what Jesus may have meant. Look at the cupped right hand of Thaddeus. Leonardo was a master of gestures, but he also knew how to make them mysterious, so that the viewer could become engaged. Is he slapping his hand down as if to say, I knew it? Is he jerking his thumb toward Judas? Now look at Matthew. Are his two upturned palms gesturing toward Jesus or Judas? The viewer need not feel bad about being confused; in their own ways Matthew and Thaddeus are also confused about what has just occurred, and they are trying to sort it out and turning to Simon for answers.

Jesus’ right hand is reaching out to a stemless glass one-third filled with red wine. In a dazzling detail, his little finger is seen through the glass itself. Just beyond the glass are a dish and a piece of bread. His left hand is palm up, gesturing at another piece of bread, which he gazes at with downcast eyes. The perspective and composition of the painting, especially as seen from the door that the monks would use to enter the hall, guide the viewer’s eyes to follow those of Jesus, down his left arm to the piece of bread.

That gesture and glance create the second moment that shimmers in the narrative of the painting: that of the institution of the Eucharist. In the gospel of Matthew, it occurs in the moment after the announcement of the betrayal: “Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and broke it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, ‘Take, eat; this is my body.’ And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, ‘Drink ye all of it, for this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.’ ” This part of the narrative reverberates outward from Jesus, encompassing both the reaction to his revelation that Judas will betray him and the institution of the holy sacrament.11





PERSPECTIVE IN THE LAST SUPPER


The only thing straightforward about the perspective in The Last Supper is the vanishing point, where all the lines of sight “tend and converge,” in Leonardo’s words. These receding lines, or orthogonals, point to the forehead of Jesus (fig. 75). When he began his work, Leonardo hammered a small nail in the center of the wall. We can see that hole in Jesus’ right temple. Then he cut thin incisions in the wall radiating out. These would help to guide the lines that were parallel in the imaginary room, such as the beams in the ceiling and the tops of the tapestries, as they receded toward the vanishing point in the painting.12

Fig. 75. Perspective lines of The Last Supper.



Fig. 76. The refectory with The Last Supper.



To understand how Leonardo brilliantly manipulated the perspective, look at the tapestries hanging along the two walls. The tops of these tapestries form lines that recede to Jesus’ forehead, just as all the perspective lines do. These tapestries were painted in a way that made them appear to be in line with the real tapestries in the actual dining hall, thus creating the illusion that the painting was an extension of the room. Yet it was not a perfect trompe l’oeil of an extended room, nor could it be. Because of the painting’s size, the perspective is different depending on the viewer’s vantage point (fig. 76). If you stand on the left side of the room, the wall next to you will appear to flow seamlessly into the left wall of the painting, but if you look across the room at the right wall, you will notice it doesn’t quite align with the painting.

This was just one of many clever manipulations Leonardo used to accommodate the fact that the painting would be seen from different parts of the room. When Alberti wrote about perspective in his treatise, he assumed that all viewers would look at a painting from the same vantage point. But with a painting as large as The Last Supper, the viewer might see it from the front or the side or while walking past. That required what Leonardo called “complex perspective,” which is a mix of natural and artificial perspective. The artificial part was needed to adjust for the fact that a person looking at a very large painting would be closer to some parts of it than to other parts. “No surface can be seen exactly as it is,” Leonardo wrote, “because the eye that sees it is not equally remote from all its edges.”13

If you stand far enough away from a picture, even a large one, the problem of the edges being at a different distance from you diminishes. Leonardo determined that a proper vantage point for a large picture should be ten to twenty times its width or height. “Stand back until your eye is at least twenty times as far off as the greatest height and width of your work,” he wrote at one point. “This will make so little difference when the eye of the spectator moves, that it will be hardly appreciable.”14

In the case of The Last Supper, which is fifteen feet high and twenty-nine feet wide, that would mean the proper vantage would be three hundred to six hundred feet back—clearly not possible. So Leonardo created an artificial ideal vantage point that was about thirty feet from the wall. In addition, he made it fifteen feet off the ground, at eye level with Jesus. No friar would ever view it from such a location, of course. But after making that spot the ideal vantage point, Leonardo proceeded to use optical tricks to make it seem less distorted from a variety of other places in the room from which it would actually be viewed.

Most cleverly, he adjusted and fudged slightly so that the perspective looks natural when viewed from a door in the right wall from which the monks entered. This meant that their first striking perception was that of Jesus’ left hand, palm up, directed right at them, as if welcoming them to the room. The angles of the ceiling are slightly higher on the right side. That makes the plane of the picture appear as if it is at eye level of the viewer coming in the door. Because the right wall of the painting is closer to the viewer entering from the door and is lit brighter, it looks bigger and feels a natural continuation of the refectory.15

Leonardo used a few tricks to disguise the fact that he had manipulated the perspective. The lines where the floor hits the back and side walls are completely hidden by the table. If you look at the picture carefully and try to imagine the floor lines, you can sense that they would have appeared distorted. In addition, a painted cornice disguises the fact that the ceiling does not extend all the way out to above the table. Otherwise viewers would have noticed that Leonardo slightly accelerated the perspective of the ceiling.

This use of accelerated perspective, in which the walls and ceiling recede toward the vanishing point more quickly than normal, was one of the many tricks that Leonardo learned from the theatrical events he produced. In Renaissance productions, the stage would contain not a rectangular room but one that rapidly became narrower and shorter, to give the illusion of greater depth. It sloped downward toward the audience, and the artificial nature of the scenery was disguised by a decorated cornice, just like the one Leonardo used atop The Last Supper. His use of such artifices is another example of why his work on plays and pageants was not time squandered.

In The Last Supper, the painted room diminishes in size so quickly that the back wall is just large enough to have three windows showing the landscape outside. The tapestries are not proportional. The table is too narrow for a comfortable supper, and the apostles are all on one side of it, where there are not enough places for them to sit. The floor is raked forward, like a stage, and the table is slanted a bit toward us as well. The characters are all at the forefront, as if in a play, and even their gestures are theatrical.

The tricks of perspective are accompanied by other clever contrivances, including little touches to make the scene appear as if it is connected to the monks eating in the refectory. The light in the painting appears to come from the actual window that is high on the left wall of the refectory, blending reality with imagination (fig. 76). Look at the right wall in the painting; it’s bathed in afternoon light as if from the actual window. Also notice the legs of the table: their shadows are cast as if from this source.

The tablecloth shows alternating concave and convex folds, as if it had been pressed and stored in the monk’s laundry room before being put on the table. Two little serving platters have eels garnished with fruit slices. They have no obvious religious or iconographic meaning; however, river eels were popular in Italy at the time, and we know that Leonardo, although usually a vegetarian, put “eels and apricots” on at least one of his shopping lists.16

All told, The Last Supper is a mix of scientific perspective and theatrical license, of intellect and fantasy, worthy of Leonardo. His study of perspective science had not made him rigid or academic as a painter. Instead, it was complemented by the cleverness and ingenuity he had picked up as a stage impresario. Once he knew the rules, he became a master at fudging and distorting them, as if creating perspectival sfumato.





DETERIORATION AND RESTORATION


When Leonardo used oil paint, he would apply a stroke or two, touch and retouch, meditate for a while, then add a few more layers until he had it perfect. This permitted him to show subtle gradations in shadows and blur the borders of objects. His strokes were so light and layered that individual brushstrokes are imperceptible, and he sometimes waited hours or days before gently adding more thin layers and retouchings.

Unfortunately, this leisurely process was not a luxury allowed the painter of a typical wall fresco, which required that the paint be applied onto wet plaster in order to remain fixed. Once a patch of plaster had been put on the wall, that area of the painting had to be completed in one day’s session, before it dried, and could not easily be reworked later.

Verrocchio, who did not paint frescoes, never taught the technique to his pupils, and it was clearly unsuited to Leonardo’s unhurried style. Instead, he decided to paint directly on the dry plaster wall, which he coated with a layer of ground white stone and then white lead primer. He used tempera paint, in which pigments were mixed into water and egg yolk, along with oil paint, in which pigments were mixed into walnut or linseed oil. Recent scientific analysis of The Last Supper shows that he experimented with varying oil-tempera proportions in different parts of the painting. Mixing water-based and oil-based pigments allowed him—or so he thought—to indulge in adding layer after layer of subtle strokes, building them up over weeks to create the shapes and tones he wanted.17

Leonardo finished the painting by early 1498, and the duke rewarded him with a bonus of a vineyard near the church, which he owned for the rest of his life. But after only twenty years, the paint began to flake, and it became evident that Leonardo’s experimental technique was a failure. When Vasari published his biography of Leonardo in 1550, he reported that the painting was “ruined.” By 1652 the painting was so faint and dissipated that the monks felt comfortable breaking a doorway through the wall at the bottom, cutting off the feet of Jesus, which were probably crossed in a manner prefiguring the crucifixion.

Over the years, there have been at least six major attempts to restore the painting, many of which only made the situation worse. The first recorded effort was in 1726 by a curator who used oil paint to fill in missing sections and then put a coat of varnish on top. Less than fifty years later, another restorer stripped away all that the first had done and started repainting the faces on his own; a public outcry forced him to stop with only three faces left to be done. During the French Revolution, anticlerical forces scratched out the eyes of the apostles, and then the refectory was used as a prison. A subsequent restorer tried to remove the painting from the wall, mistakenly thinking it was a fresco. In the early twentieth century, two cleanings were done that avoided further damaging the painting and slowed its deterioration. Allied bombs hit the refectory during World War II, but the painting was protected by sandbags.

The latest restoration, which began in 1978 and lasted twenty-one years, was the most extensive ever. Chief curator Pinin Brambilla Barcilon and her team began by using infrared reflectoscopy and microscopic samples to try to discover, as best as possible, the original elements of the painting. She also had her restorers study Leonardo’s drawings and the copies of the painting made during his lifetime. The original intention was to have the wall display only what could be known to be done by Leonardo’s hand, but that turned out to be unsatisfying because so little remained. So the restorers reconstructed the missing areas in a way that indicated what was and wasn’t original; where it was not possible to discern the original artwork, the team used subtle watercolors with a lighter hue to give a sense of the original while indicating that these sections were speculative.18

Not everyone was pleased. Art critic Michael Daley wrote that the result was “a distinctly mongrel work showing alarmingly little original paint and very much alien ‘compensatory’ and ‘reintegrating’ new paint.” But Brambilla Barcilon generally drew praise for creating and re-creating what is, in fact, a piece of art that seems to be as deeply faithful to the original as is possible. “Not only was the original color recovered, but also the clarity of the architectural structure, the perspective devices, and the physiognomies,” she said. “The faces, burdened with grotesque features from so many restorations, again manifest a genuine expressiveness. Now the faces of the apostles seem to genuinely participate in the drama of the moment and evoke the gamut of emotional responses intended by Leonardo to Christ’s revelation.”19

As a result, The Last Supper, both in its creation and in its current state, becomes not just an example of Leonardo’s genius but also a metaphor for it. It was innovative in its art and too innovative in its methods. The conception was brilliant but the execution flawed. The emotional narrative is profound but slightly mysterious, and the current state of the painting adds another thin veil of mystery to the ones that so often shroud Leonardo’s life and work.





