CHAPTER 16




* * *





The Milan Portraits



PORTRAIT OF A MUSICIAN


Among the many intriguing things about Leonardo are the mysteries that surround much of his work. Take, for example, Portrait of a Musician (fig. 67), painted in the mid-1480s. His only known portrait of a man, there are no surviving records or contemporary mentions of it. It is unclear who the subject is and whether the work was commissioned or if it was ever delivered. It is even not certain that Leonardo painted all of it. And like far too many of his pieces, it is unfinished, though it is not known why.

Fig. 67. Portrait of a Musician.



Painted on a walnut panel, which Leonardo had begun to favor, the portrait is of a young man with tightly coiled curls (no surprise there), seen in three-quarter profile, holding a folded sheet of music. His torso, brown vest, and hands are unfinished. Even parts of his face seem missing some of the final layers Leonardo usually applied. And unlike Leonardo’s other works, his body faces in the same direction as his gaze, with no sense of movement.

The rigidity is one reason some have doubted that Leonardo painted it. But other elements—the curls, the expressive and liquid eyes, the use of light and shadow—have led most scholars to believe that he at least painted the face, and perhaps one of his students or assistants, such as Giovanni Antonio Boltraffio, added the unfinished and unimpressive torso.1 What most distinguishes the face as a Leonardo creation is the sense that this is an emotion-laden, real person, with inner thoughts and a whiff of melancholy, whose motions of the mind are about to trigger a movement of the lips.

There is no evidence that the painting was done as a paid commission, nor is it of a notable dignitary. It seems that Leonardo simply decided, on his own, to paint the young man. Perhaps Leonardo was moved by his delicate beauty and golden curls or had a personal connection to him. Some have suggested the subject was Leonardo’s friend Franchino Gaffurio, who had become the conductor of the Cathedral choir in Milan in 1484, around the time the portrait was painted. But the portrait does not look like others known to be of Gaffurio, who would have been in his mid-thirties at the time, older than the man portrayed.

I prefer to believe that the portrait is of Atalante Migliorotti, the young musician who accompanied Leonardo a few years earlier from Florence to Milan, bearing the lyre.2 He would go on to be a distinguished performer, but at the time he was in his early twenties and still working in the Sforza court along with Leonardo. If he was in fact the subject, it would make the Musician a personal work that Leonardo undertook for his own satisfaction. We know that Leonardo was taken by Atalante’s looks. In his inventory from 1482, there is that item “a portrait of Atalante with his face raised.” Perhaps that was a study for this portrait, or even the beginnings of the painting itself.

Although the Musician does not have “his face raised,” he is gazing out into the light. Leonardo’s treatment of the light on his face is the most striking feature of the painting. The spots of luster in the liquid eyeballs show how the light is falling. The illumination is stronger than in other paintings by Leonardo, who wrote that muted light is better for a portrait. But the strong light in this case allowed him to provide a brilliant demonstration of how light hits the contours of a face. The shadows beneath the cheekbone and chin and even the right eyelid make the portrait more lifelike than others of his era. In fact, one flaw in the painting is that the shadows are too harsh, especially under the nose. Leonardo would later warn about the crudeness produced by the use of sharp light:

An object will display the greatest difference of light and shade when it is seen in the strongest light. . . . But this should not be much used in painting, because the works would be crude and ungraceful. An object seen in a moderate light displays little difference in its light and shade, and this is the case towards evening or when the day is cloudy; works painted then are tender, and every kind of face becomes graceful. Thus, in everything extremes are to be avoided: Too much light gives crudeness; too little prevents our seeing.3

The Musician illustrates the effects of light and the perils of too much of it. Perhaps the flaw can be explained by the fact that the painting is not fully finished. Parts of the face do not have as many thin layers of oil as Leonardo usually used. If he had continued to perfect the painting, a process that often took him years, there likely would have been a few more strokes, and a bit subtler texture, at least under the nose.

There is one other notable feature about the light. “The pupil of the eye dilates and contracts as it sees a less or greater light,” Leonardo noted early on in his studies of the human eye and optics.4 He also observed how the changes in pupil size take a few moments, as the eyes adjust to the light. Almost eerily, Leonardo has the two pupils of the musician dilated to different degrees: his left eye, which faces the light more directly, has a smaller pupil, which is correct. Again Leonardo’s science intersects with his art, this time to give us, in the subtlest of ways, a sense of the passing of a moment as our eyes sweep across the face of the musician, from his left eye to his right.





CECILIA GALLERANI, THE LADY WITH AN ERMINE


Cecilia Gallerani was a striking beauty who was born into Milan’s educated middle class. Her father was a diplomat and financial agent for the duke, and her mother was the daughter of a noted law professor. They were not exceedingly wealthy; her father died when she was seven, and she had six brothers who divided up the inheritance. But they were cultured and educated. Cecilia composed poetry, delivered orations, wrote letters in Latin, and would later have two novels by Matteo Bandello dedicated to her.5

In 1483, when she was ten, her brothers were able to arrange a promising marriage contract for her to Giovanni Stefano Visconti, a member of the family that once ruled Milan. But four years later, before the wedding took place, the contract was dissolved. The brothers had not kept up with the dowry payments. The dissolution agreement noted that the marriage had not been consummated, protecting her virtue.

There may have been another reason the contract was dissolved and the stipulation made about her virtue. Around that time, she attracted the notice of Ludovico Sforza. The de facto Duke of Milan was a ruthless man, but he had good taste. He was attracted to Cecilia for both her mind and her beauty. By 1489, when she was fifteen, she was living not with her family but in rooms provided by Ludovico. The following year she was pregnant with his son.

There was one big problem with their relationship. Since 1480 Ludovico had been contracted to marry Beatrice d’Este, the daughter of Ercole d’Este, the Duke of Ferrara. The arrangement, which represented a major alliance for Ludovico with one of Italy’s most ancient noble dynasties, had been made when Beatrice was five, and their wedding was scheduled to take place when she turned fifteen, in 1490. It was to be an occasion marked by great pomp and pageantry.

But Ludovico, enamored with Cecilia, was unenthusiastic. In late 1490 the Duke of Ferrara’s ambassador to Milan sent back a candid report. Ludovico was besotted with an “inamorata,” he told Beatrice’s father. “He keeps her with him at the castle, and wherever he goes, and wants to give her everything. She is pregnant, and as beautiful as a flower, and often he brings me with him to visit her.” As a result, the wedding between Ludovico and Beatrice was delayed. It finally took place the following year, with glorious celebrations in Pavia and then Milan.

Over time, Ludovico would come to respect Beatrice and, as we will see, be deeply bereaved when she died. But initially he continued his relationship with Cecilia, who stayed in a suite of rooms in the Sforza Castle. In those days before the pretense of sexual discretion was required of rulers, Ludovico continued to confide his feelings to the ever-informative Ferrara ambassador, who reported them back to Beatrice’s father. Ludovico told the ambassador that “he wished he could go and make love to Cecilia, and be with her in peace, and this was what his wife wanted too, because she did not want to submit to him.” Finally, after Cecilia gave birth to their son, who was fulsomely celebrated in sonnets by the court poets, Ludovico arranged for her to be married to a wealthy count, and she settled into the life of a respected literary patron.

Cecilia Gallerani’s alluring beauty would be captured for the ages. At the height of their relationship, around 1489, when she was fifteen, Ludovico commissioned Leonardo to paint her portrait (fig. 68). It was his first painting assignment for Leonardo, who had been in Milan for seven years, had earned a role at court as an impresario, and had just begun work on the horse monument. The result is a stunning and innovative masterpiece, in many ways the most delightful and charming of Leonardo’s paintings. Other than the Mona Lisa, it is my favorite of his works.

Painted in oil on a walnut panel, the portrait of Cecilia, now known as Lady with an Ermine, was so innovative, so emotionally charged and alive, that it helped to transform the art of portraiture. The twentieth-century art historian John Pope-Hennessy called it the “first modern portrait” and “the first painting in European art to introduce the idea that a portrait may express the sitter’s thoughts through posture and gestures.”6 Instead of being shown in profile, as was traditional, she is in three-quarters view. Her body is turned to our left, but her head has seemingly snapped to our right to look at something, presumably Ludovico, coming from the direction of the light. The ermine she is holding also seems to have gone on alert, ears cocked. Exceedingly alive, neither have the vacant or undirected stare found in other portraits of the time, including Leonardo’s only previous portrait of a woman, Ginevra de’ Benci. Something is happening in the scene. Leonardo has captured a narrative contained in an instant, one involving outward lives and inner lives. In the medley of hands, paws, eyes, and a mysterious smile, we see both motions of the body and motions of the mind.

Fig. 68. Lady with an Ermine, Cecilia Gallerani.



Leonardo loved puns, including visual ones, and just as the juniper plays on Ginevra de’ Benci’s name, so does the ermine (in Greek, galée) evoke the name of Gallerani. A white ermine also was a symbol of purity. “The ermine would die rather than soil itself,” Leonardo wrote in one of his bestiary entries. And also: “The ermine out of moderation never eats but once a day, and it would rather let itself be captured by hunters than take refuge in a dirty lair, in order not to stain its purity.” In addition, the ermine is a reference to Ludovico, who had been bestowed the Order of the Ermine by the king of Naples, prompting a court poet to lyricize him as “the Italian moor, the white ermine.”7

The twisting head and body, a form of contrapposto, had become one of Leonardo’s lively signatures, such as in the angel of Virgin of the Rocks. The writhing but poised ermine mimics Cecilia’s movement, spiraling in synch with her. Both Cecilia’s wrist and that of the ermine are gently cocked, protectively. Their shared vitality makes it seem that they are not merely characters in a picture but players in a real-life situation, part of a scene involving a third participant, the off-scene Ludovico who has caught their eye.

At the time, Leonardo was formulating his theories of how the mind works. There is clearly a lot going on in Cecilia’s. We see it not only in her eyes but in her hint of a smile. Yet as would be the case with the Mona Lisa, the smile is mysterious. Look at Cecilia a hundred times, and you will sense a hundred different emotions. How happy is she to see Ludovico? Okay, now look again. The same is even true for her pet. Leonardo had such skill that he could make an ermine look intelligent.

Leonardo took exquisite care with each detail, from the knuckles and tendons of Cecilia’s hand to her braided and gauze-veiled hair. The coiffure and its sheathing, known as a coazzone, and her Spanish-style dress, became fashionable in Milan in 1489, when Isabella of Aragon married the hapless Gian Galeazzo Sforza.

The light on Cecilia is softer than that Leonardo used for the Musician. The shadow under her nose is subtler. The greatest intensity of light, as Leonardo demonstrated in his optics studies, comes when a beam hits a surface head-on rather than at an oblique angle. This occurs on the top of Cecilia’s left shoulder and right cheek. The illumination levels on the other contours of her face are done with delicate precision according to formulas he had developed for the proportional variations of light intensities at various angles of incidence. His scientific understanding of optics thus enhanced the three-dimensional illusion of the painting.8

Some of the shadows are softened by reflected or secondary radiance. For example, the lower edge of her right hand catches a glow from the ermine’s white fur, and underneath her cheek the shadow is softened by light reflected from her chest. “When the arms cross in front of the breast,” Leonardo wrote in his notebook, “you should show, between the shadow cast by the arms on the breast and the shadow on the arms themselves, a little light seeming to fall through a space between the breast and the arms; and the more you wish the arm to look detached from the breast the broader you must make the light.”9

To truly appreciate Leonardo’s genius, look at the spot in the painting where the ermine’s furry head is set in front of the soft flesh of Cecilia’s chest. The ermine’s head is a marvel of modeling, rendered with three-dimensional clarity as the light strikes each strand of fur covering the subtly contoured skull. Cecilia’s flesh is a soft blend of pale tones and reds, and its texture contrasts with that of the hard beads catching spots of lustrous light.10

The portrait was celebrated in a sonnet by the court poet Bernardo Bellincioni with his usual orotund exuberance, in this case justified:

Why are you angry? whom do you envy, Nature?

Vinci, who has portrayed one of your stars;

Cecilia, now so beautiful, is she

Whose lovely eyes cast the sun into dim shadow. . . .

He’s made her seem to listen, but not to speak. . . .

Therefore you may now thank Ludovico,

And the genius and skill of Leonardo,

Who want her to belong to posterity.11

By noting that she seems to listen but not speak, Bellincioni conveyed what makes the portrait so momentous: it captures the sense of an inner mind at work. Her emotions seem to be revealed, or at least hinted at, by the look in her eyes, the enigma of her smile, and the erotic way she clutches and caresses the ermine. She is visibly thinking, and her face flickers with emotions. As Leonardo portrayed the motions of her mind and soul, he played with our own inner thoughts in a way that no portrait had done before.





LA BELLE FERRONNIÈRE


Leonardo’s experimentation with light and shadow is seen in another portrait from this period of a woman in the Sforza court, known as La Belle Ferronnière (fig. 69). The subject is most likely Lucrezia Crivelli, who succeeded Cecilia as Ludovico’s maîtresse-en-titre (official mistress), even though such duties would seem to conflict (or perhaps not) with her role as the lady-in-waiting to Ludovico’s new wife, Beatrice d’Este.12 Like Cecilia, Lucrezia bore Ludovico a son and apparently was similarly rewarded with a portrait of herself by Leonardo. Indeed, the walnut panel on which Leonardo painted it was likely from the same tree as the panel for Cecilia’s portrait.

Leonardo’s depiction of reflected light is most evident under Lucrezia’s left cheek. Her chin and neck are in gentle muted shadows. But the light, which comes from the top left of the painting, falls directly on the smooth and flat plane of her shoulder, and then it bounces up and causes a streak of light—almost exaggerated and of a strange mottled hue—on her left jawbone. As Leonardo wrote in his notebook, “Reverberations are caused by bodies of bright nature with flat and semi-opaque surfaces; when struck by light they rebound it back like the bounce of a ball.”13

Leonardo was then deeply immersed in his scientific study of how light varies according to the angle at which it strikes a curved surface, and his notebooks are filled with carefully measured and annotated diagrams (figs. 71 and 72). No painter captured so perfectly how shadows and highlights on a face can make it appear three-dimensional and perfectly modeled. The problem is that the streak of light on Lucrezia’s cheekbone is so glaring that it seems unnatural, causing some to speculate that it was later painted by an overeager pupil or restorer. That seems unlikely. I think it’s more probable that Leonardo was so intent on showing light reflected into a shadow that he overdid it slightly, daring to be unsubtle.

Fig. 69. La Belle Ferronnière.



In this portrait, Leonardo also continued to experiment with his haunting method of creating a stare or gaze that seems to follow a viewer around a room. This “Mona Lisa effect” is not magical; it simply comes from drawing a realistic set of eyes staring directly at the viewer with proper perspective, shading, and modeling. But Leonardo discovered that the effect works best when the gaze is intense and the eyes slightly off-kilter, thus making it more noticeable. He was refining the technique he had used in Ginevra de’ Benci. Ginevra’s stare seems slightly averted and distant, until you look at each eye individually and directly; then you see that each in its own way is looking at you.

Likewise, in La Belle Ferronnière, Lucrezia seems to be staring so directly that it can make us uncomfortable. When you look at each eye individually, it seems to be looking right at you, and this seems true even as you walk back and forth in front of the painting. But when you try to engage both of her eyes at the same time, they seem slightly unaligned. Her left eye appears to be looking off into the distance, perhaps drifting a bit to the left, partly because the eyeball is shifted. It is hard to meet her gaze in both eyes.

La Belle Ferronnière is not in the same league as Lady with an Ermine or the Mona Lisa. There’s a hint of a smile, but it’s not truly alluring or mysterious. The reflected light on the left jawbone seems too studied. The hair is so flat and uninspired, especially compared to Leonardo’s usual standards, that it seems to have been painted by others. The head is turned but the body is rigid rather than having even a hint of a Leonardesque twist. The headband and necklace display no mastery of modeling; in fact, they look somewhat unfinished. Only the ribbons on her shoulders flow and catch the light in a masterful way.

The great Bernard Berenson wrote in 1907, “One would regret to have to accept this as Leonardo’s own work,” though Berenson ultimately did. His protégé Kenneth Clark suggested that it was churned out to please the duke but not captivate the ages. “I am now inclined to think that the picture is by Leonardo, and shows how in these years he was willing to subdue his genius to the needs of the court.” There is enough evidence, I think, to support an attribution, in whole or part, to Leonardo: the use of a walnut panel similar in grain to that of Lady with an Ermine, the existence of some court sonnets that seem to refer to his painting such a work, and the fact that some aspects of the painting have a beauty worthy of the master. Perhaps it was a collaborative work of his studio, produced to fulfill a ducal commission, with some involvement from Leonardo’s brush but not his heart and soul.14





PORTRAIT OF A YOUNG FIANCÉE, ALSO KNOWN AS LA BELLA PRINCIPESSA


In early 1998 a profile of a young woman drawn with colored chalk on vellum was put up for auction at Christie’s in Manhattan (fig. 70). The artist and subject were unknown, and it was described in the catalogue as the work of one of the early nineteenth-century Germans who imitated the style of the Italian Renaissance.15 A collector named Peter Silverman, who had an eye for spotting hidden treasures, saw it in the catalogue and was so intrigued that he went to inspect it at the showroom. “This is really good,” he later recalled thinking. “I don’t understand why it’s catalogued as nineteenth century.” He sensed that it had actually been made during the Renaissance. So he submitted a bid of $18,000, double the minimum estimate set by the auction house. It was not quite enough. His bid was topped by one of $21,850, and Silverman assumed that he would never see the portrait again.16

Fig. 70. Portrait of a Young Fiancée, also known as La Bella Principessa.



But nine years later Silverman happened into a gallery on Manhattan’s Upper East Side owned by Kate Ganz, a respected dealer who specialized in Italian Old Master drawings. On an easel in the middle of a table near the door sat the beguiling portrait. Once again he became convinced it was by a Renaissance master. “The young woman seemed alive and breathing, every feature perfect,” he recalled. “Her mouth was serene, her lips gently parted with the subtlest hint of expression, but her eye in profile was radiant with emotion. The formality of the portrait could not mask her blushing youth. She was exquisite.”17 Feigning nonchalance, he asked Ganz the price. She offered to sell it for about what it had sold for nine years earlier. Silverman’s wife hastily arranged for a wire transfer of the money, and he walked out of the gallery with the picture wrapped in an envelope under his arm.

As a work of art, the picture is alluring but not extraordinary. The subject is portrayed in conventional profile, body rigid, with little of Leonardo’s usual sense of coiled movements of the body and mind. Its primary artistic distinction is the subject’s hint of a smile that changes slightly based on the viewer’s angle and distance, thus prefiguring that of the Mona Lisa.

What is most interesting about the portrait is Silverman’s quest to prove that it was by Leonardo. Like most artists of his time, Leonardo never signed his works nor kept a record of them. So the question of authentication—figuring out which truly deserve to be called autograph works by Leonardo—becomes yet another fascinating aspect of grappling with his genius. In the case of the portrait that Silverman bought, the saga involved a combination of detective work, technical wizardry, historical research, and connoisseurship. The interdisciplinary effort, which wove together art and science, was worthy of Leonardo, who would have appreciated the interplay between those who love the humanities and those who love technology.

The process began with connoisseurs, people with a deep intuition about works of art based on years of studied appreciation. Many of the attributions made during the nineteenth and twentieth century were driven by the connoisseurship of art authorities such as Walter Pater, Bernard Berenson, Roger Fry, and Kenneth Clark. But connoisseurship can be controversial. It was put on trial, for example, in a 1920s case involving the authenticity of another purported Leonardo work, a copy of La Belle Ferronnière that had turned up in Kansas City. “This is not for beginners,” Berenson explained as an expert witness. “It takes a very long time before you get a sort of sixth sense that comes from accumulated experience.” He declared that the picture in question was not by Leonardo, prompting the owner to dismiss him as “the majordomo of picture guessers.” After fifteen hours, the jury declared it could not reach a verdict, and the case was later settled with a compromise. In this instance the connoisseurs were right. The picture in question was not by Leonardo. But the case became a rallying point for populists who felt the world of art connoisseurs was an elitist cabal.18

The connoisseurs who initially saw the drawing that Silverman purchased, including the experts at Christie’s and those consulted by the dealer Kate Ganz, summarily dismissed the idea that it might be a true Renaissance work. But Silverman was convinced that it was. He brought it to Paris, where he had an apartment, and showed it to the art historian Mina Gregori. She told him, “This drawing shows dual influences: Florentine in its delicate beauty and Lombard in the costume and braid, or coazzone, which were typical of a court lady of the late fifteenth century. Of course, the most obvious artist to come to mind is Leonardo, one of the few artists who made the transition from Florentine to Milanese.” She encouraged Silverman to investigate further.19

One day Silverman was at the Louvre admiring a portrait by Giovanni Antonio Boltraffio, who worked in Leonardo’s studio. There he ran into Nicholas Turner, a former curator at the British Museum and the Getty in Los Angeles. Silverman pulled out his digital camera and showed him a photograph of the portrait. “I saw a transparency of this not long ago,” Turner said, calling the work “remarkable.” At that point Silverman still assumed the work was by one of Leonardo’s pupils or disciples. Turner surprised him by disagreeing. Pointing out the left-handed slanted hatchings that were Leonardo’s hallmark, he said that it was likely by the master himself. “All aspects of the shading of this portrait provide visual testimony of Leonardo’s theories of illumination,” Turner later pronounced.20

The problem with relying on connoisseurs is that in any difficult case there is usually an equal and opposite cadre of them. Among the most prominent naysayers were Thomas Hoving, director of New York’s Metropolitan Museum, and Carmen Bambach, the curator of drawings there. Hoving, a charismatic showman, called the picture too “sweet,” and Bambach, a respected and diligent scholar, invoked her intuition to declare, “It does not look like a Leonardo.”21

Bambach also pointed out that there was no known case of Leonardo drawing on vellum. That is true for the four thousand known autograph drawings he made on his own, but the geometrical illustrations he made for two of the editions of Luca Pacioli’s On Divine Proportion were on vellum. That would turn out to be a clue: it indicated that, if the portrait of the young woman was by Leonardo, then it may have been done for a book produced by someone else.

Ganz, the art dealer who had sold the picture to Silverman, not surprisingly agreed with the skeptical New York connoisseurs. “At the end of the day,” she told the New York Times, “when you talk about connoisseurship, it comes down to whether something is beautiful enough to be a Leonardo, whether it resonates with all of the qualities that define his handwriting—sublime modeling, exquisite delicacy, an unparalleled understanding of anatomy—and to me this drawing has none of those things.”22

With connoisseurs divided, the next step was to set up a Leonardesque interplay between intuition and scientific experimentation. Silverman began by having the vellum dated by a carbon-24 test, which measures the decay of carbon in organic material to determine how old it is. The results indicated that the vellum came from sometime between 1440 and 1650. That proved little, since a forger or copier could have found a piece of old vellum. But at least it didn’t eliminate Leonardo.

Silverman then took the picture to Lumiere Technology, a Paris-based company that specializes in digital, infrared, and multispectral analysis of artworks. He rode there on the back of a friend’s Vespa, clutching the portrait in his arms. Pascal Cotte, the firm’s founder and chief technology officer, made a series of super-high-resolution digital photographs that could capture 1,600 pixels per square millimeter. That enabled the image to be magnified hundreds of times, showing each strand of hair.

The magnified images allowed a precise comparison of the picture’s details with works known to be by Leonardo. The interlace ornamentation of the young woman’s costume, for example, had loops and knotwork that were twined in the same way as the ornamentation in Lady with an Ermine, and they were even done with the shadows meticulously drawn and the proper perspective as the ornamentation receded.23 As Vasari wrote of Leonardo, “He even went so far as to waste his time in drawing knots of cords.” Another example was the iris of the eye. The comparison to Lady with an Ermine, Silverman said, “showed a thrillingly identical treatment of each detail, including the outer corner of the eyelid, the fold of the upper eyelid, the contour of the iris, the lower eyelashes, the upper eyelashes, and the juxtaposition of the edge of the lower eyelid with the bottom edge of the iris.”24

Silverman and Cotte showed the high-resolution studies to other experts. The first was Cristina Geddo, a Leonardo scholar at the University of Geneva. She was struck by the use of three-color (black, white, red) pastel crayons, a technique that Leonardo pioneered and discussed in his notebooks. “Close examination of the portrait’s surface reveals it is extensively drawn with fine, left-handed shading (slanting from top left to bottom right), which may be seen both with the naked eye and, far more effectively, in the digital scans made under infra-red light,” she wrote in a scholarly journal.25

The dean of Leonardo scholars, Carlo Pedretti, also weighed in, writing, “The sitter’s profile is sublime, and the eye is drawn exactly as it is in so many of Leonardo’s drawings of this period.”26 For example, the proportions of the head and neck, along with the details of the way the eyes are delineated, correspond very closely to a drawing from around 1490, now in the Royal Collection at Windsor, called Portrait of a Young Woman in Profile,27 and of a drawing he would do of Isabella d’Este in Mantua in 1500.28

At that point, Silverman and Cotte turned to Martin Kemp, an Oxford don of impeccable integrity whose career was focused on studying Leonardo. Kemp, who regularly received missives asking him to authenticate purported Leonardo works, was not optimistic when he opened, in March 2008, the email of a high-resolution of the portrait from Lumiere Technology. “Oh, dear, another bout of painful correspondence,” he thought. But as he magnified the image on his computer and carefully studied the left-handed hatching and details, he felt a shiver of excitement. “If you look at the hair band, it pulls this little dip in the back of her hair,” he said. “Leonardo always had that wonderful feeling for the stiffness of materials, for how they react under pressure.”29

Kemp, who took no money or expenses for his expert opinions, agreed to travel to see the original, by then stored in a Zurich bank vault. He was cautious, but after studying the portrait for a few hours from every angle, he became more positive. “Her ear plays a subtle game of hide-and-seek below the gentle waves of her hair,” he noticed. “The iris of her pensive eye retains the translucent radiance of a living, breathing person.”30

Kemp became a believer. “After forty years in the Leonardo business, I thought I’d seen it all,” he told Silverman. “But I had not. The delight I had when I first saw it has been reinforced enormously. I’m absolutely convinced.” He partnered with Cotte to accumulate more evidence and publish it as a book, La Bella Principessa: The Story of the New Masterpiece by Leonardo Da Vinci.31

The subject’s dress and her coazzone hairstyle indicate that she was connected to Ludovico Sforza’s court in Milan in the 1490s. Leonardo had already painted two of Ludovico’s mistresses, Cecilia Gallerani in Lady with an Ermine and Lucrezia Crivelli in La Belle Ferronnière. Who might this third woman be? Through a process of elimination, Kemp identified her as Bianca Sforza, the duke’s illegitimate (but later legitimated) daughter. In 1496, when she was about thirteen, she was married to one of the most important members of the court: Galeazzo Sanseverino, the commander of Ludovico’s military and a close friend of Leonardo, who spent time at his stables making drawings for his horse monument. A few months after she married, Bianca died of what may have been a problem pregnancy. Kemp decided to name the portrait La Bella Principessa, even though the duke’s daughters weren’t officially princesses.32

There was one other key piece of scientific evidence that sealed the authentication, or at least initially seemed to do so. Cotte had uncovered in his scans a fingerprint on the top of the portrait. If it could be matched to a fingerprint on another work by Leonardo, who often used his hands and fingers to smooth his colors, that would come close to being dispositive.

Cotte gave an image of the fingerprint to Christophe Champod, a professor at the Institute of Criminology and Criminal Law in Lausanne. Finding it almost impossible to read, he crowdsourced the task, posting it on a website and getting close to fifty people offering their annotations. Alas, the result was inconclusive. No patterns could be determined. “I consider this mark as being of no value,” Champod declared.33

At this point a controversial character entered the tale. Peter Paul Biro, a forensic art examiner based in Montreal, specialized in finding and using fingerprints to authenticate art. He had done so, or claimed to have, with artists ranging from J. M. W. Turner to Jackson Pollock, shaking up the insular club of art connoisseurs in the process. Kemp, Cotte, and Silverman contacted him in early 2009 to render his verdict on La Bella Principessa.

Using a digital enlargement of the picture, Biro claimed that he was able to discern ridge-path details of the fingerprint, and he compared it to a fingerprint that Leonardo was known to have left on Saint Jerome in the Wilderness. He declared that there were at least eight points of similarity, and he also claimed that these were compatible with a fingerprint on Leonardo’s Ginevra de’ Benci.

Biro demonstrated his discoveries to David Grann, a respected best-selling author and staff writer at the New Yorker, who was writing a profile of him. Biro zoomed in on the blurry lines and then showed a series of images taken by multispectral cameras. That still did not make the prints clear enough. He told Grann that he had then applied a “proprietary” technique, which he didn’t demonstrate, to produce a clearer image. This new image allowed him, he said, to pinpoint the eight points of similarity with the Saint Jerome print. “For a moment, Biro stared at the prints in silence, as if still awed by what he had found,” Grann reported. “The discovery, he said, was a validation of his life’s work.”34

Biro detailed his claims in a chapter he wrote for the book by Kemp and Cotte, which was published in 2010. “The correspondence between the fingerprints on Leonardo’s Saint Jerome and La Bella Principessa provides a highly valuable piece of evidence among the numerous other analyses presented in this book,” Biro concluded. Though he said that the evidence was not strong enough to decide a criminal legal case, “the coincidence of the eight marked characteristics is strongly supportive of Leonardo’s authorship.”35

The fingerprint evidence made headlines worldwide when it was released in October 2009. “The art world is abuzz with the recent discovery that a portrait thought to be the drawing of an unknown nineteenth century German artist is now being attributed to the Italian master Leonardo da Vinci,” Time magazine reported. “And the way the revelation was made is straight out of a Sherlock Holmes novel: researchers traced the portrait to the artist using a 500-year-old fingerprint.” The Guardian announced, “Art experts believe a new portrait by Leonardo da Vinci may have been discovered thanks to a 500-year-old fingerprint,” and the BBC headline was “Finger Points to New da Vinci Art.” Silverman gave the inside story to a friend at Antiques Trade Gazette, which reported, “ATG have had exclusive access to that scientific evidence and can reveal that it literally reveals the hand—and fingerprint—of the artist in the work.” The picture that Silverman had bought for around $20,000 was now estimated to be worth close to $150 million.36

Then, as with any good detective tale, there was a twist. In July 2010, less than a year after the big headlines, David Grann’s colorful and deeply reported profile of Biro appeared in the New Yorker. “Somewhere along the way,” Grann wrote about the image Biro had been trying to project of himself, “I began to notice small, and then more glaring, imperfections in this picture.”37

Grann’s 16,000-word narrative painted a troubling portrait of Biro, his methods, and his motives. It pointed to discrepancies in his story about analyzing paint samples of Jackson Pollock, recounted the various lawsuits and allegations of fraud Biro had faced, and quoted people alleging that he had tried to milk them for money when authenticating a picture. It also raised questions about the reliability of his “enhanced” fingerprint images, and it quoted a renowned fingerprint examiner who said that the eight similarities Biro had identified didn’t exist. Even more explosively, the article reported that the prints Biro claimed to be of Pollock seemed so uniform that an investigator thought it was possible that someone had fabricated them with a rubber stamp. The fingerprints “screamed forgery,” the investigator told Grann.38 Biro vigorously denied the charges and implications in the article. He sued Grann and the New Yorker for libel, but his suit was dismissed by a federal judge, whose ruling was later affirmed by an appeals court.39

The New Yorker’s attack on Biro’s credibility undermined his assessment that Leonardo’s fingerprints were on La Bella Principessa. Kemp and Cotte deleted the chapter of their book written by Biro when an Italian edition was published. Although they insisted that Biro’s fingerprint evidence was just one element of the case, it had been a very public element. Opinion seemed to turn back in favor of the doubters.

Then, like a Leonardo spiral, the story took yet another twist. Cotte had noticed on the left side of the picture signs that someone had used a sharp knife to cut the tough vellum, making a couple of small slips, and that there were three tiny holes along the edge. Kemp began to explore the theory that the picture had once been bound in a book. That might also account for why the picture was on vellum, which was used for books at the time. “My hypothesis, at this stage, is that it was in a volume of poetry dedicated to Bianca,” Kemp recalled, “and that it may have been a frontispiece.”40

Kemp then received an email from David Wright, a retired professor of art history at the University of South Florida, telling him about a volume in Warsaw’s National Library of Poland. It was a history of the Sforza family, richly illustrated on vellum, that was made to commemorate the wedding of Bianca Sforza. Each of the original versions had a different frontispiece illustration of whomever it was dedicated to. The edition in Warsaw, made in 1496, had been owned by the king of France, who gave it in 1518 to the king of Poland when he married Bona Sforza, a child of Ludovico’s hapless nephew Gian Galeazzo Sforza.41

By this point there was enough public interest in the story that National Geographic, working with PBS, sent a camera crew to accompany Kemp and Cotte to the Polish National Library in 2011 to see what they would find. Using a high-resolution camera to trace how each folio was bound into the volume, they discovered that one sheet was apparently cut out. The vellum of that sheet matched the vellum of La Bella Principessa. The missing page would have been right after the introductory texts, just where an illustration was likely to have been located. In addition, the three holes in the picture aligned with three of the five stitching holes in the bound volume. The different number of holes, they surmised, could be explained by the untidy way the portrait was cut out or because two additional stitches were added when the book was rebound in the eighteenth century.42

Few things are ever completely certain in the misty realms surrounding Leonardo, and there are still skeptics who doubt that La Bella Principessa is by Leonardo.43 The shapes in the drawing are too delineated, lacking Leonardo’s sfumato, and the outlines of the eyeball and contours of the face are too sharp. The facial features are devoid of deep emotion, and the hair lacks luster or curls. “La Bella Principessa is not a Leonardo,” the Guardian art critic Jonathan Jones wrote in 2015. “I honestly don’t know how anyone who loves his art could make that mistake. There is a deadness to this woman’s eye, a coldness to the way she is posed and drawn that has no resemblance to Leonardo da Vinci’s energy or vitality.” Referring jokingly to a very dubious claim by a noted art forger that he faked the piece in the 1970s using as a model a girl he knew from Bolton, England, Jones concluded, “She looks so miserable she may well be on a break from working at a Bolton supermarket in the 1970s.”44 The drawing was pointedly excluded when London’s National Gallery held a major exhibition focused on Leonardo’s work in Milan. “There was never a question that the so-called Principessa could be hung among Leonardo’s masterworks,” said one of the curators, Arturo Galansino.

On the other side, Kemp became increasingly convinced that it is “close to an open-and-shut case” that La Bella Principessa was drawn by Leonardo. “The dating of the portrait to 1496 and the identification of the sitter as Bianca are thus confirmed to a high level of probability,” he and Cotte wrote after their examination of the Sforza book in Poland. “The authorship of the portrait by Leonardo is also powerfully supported. Assertions that it is a modern forgery, a 19th-century pastiche, or a copy of a lost Leonardo are all effectively eliminated.”45

Whichever assessments are correct, the tale of La Bella Principessa provides us with some insights into what we do and do not know about Leonardo’s art. The intense human and scientific drama surrounding attempts to authenticate the picture, and to debunk it, helps us better understand what makes something an autograph Leonardo.





