CHAPTER 31




* * *





The Mona Lisa



THE CULMINATION


And now, the Mona Lisa (fig. 134). The discussion of Leonardo’s pièce de résistance could have come earlier in this book. He began working on it in 1503, when he returned to Florence after serving Cesare Borgia. But he had not finished it when he moved back to Milan in 1506. In fact, he carried it with him, and continued to work on it, throughout his second period in Milan and then during his three years in Rome. He would even take it to France on the final leg of his life journey, adding tiny strokes and light layers through 1517. It would be in his studio there when he died.

So it makes sense to consider the Mona Lisa near the end of his career, exploring it as the culmination of a life spent perfecting an ability to stand at the intersection of art and nature. The poplar panel with multiple layers of light oil glazes, applied over the course of many years, exemplifies the multiple layers of Leonardo’s genius. What began as a portrait of a silk merchant’s young wife became a quest to portray the complexities of human emotion, made memorable through the mysteries of a hinted smile, and to connect our nature to that of our universe. The landscape of her soul and of nature’s soul are intertwined.

Forty years before he put his last touches on the Mona Lisa, while still working in Verrocchio’s shop in Florence, a young Leonardo had painted another commissioned portrait of a woman, Ginevra de’ Benci (fig. 14). On the surface, the two pictures have similarities. Both are of new wives of Florentine cloth merchants portrayed against a river landscape, their bodies in a three-quarters pose. But more striking are the differences between the two paintings. They show the development of Leonardo’s painterly skills and, more important, his maturation as a scientist, philosopher, and humanist. Ginevra de’ Benci was made by a young artist with astonishing skills of observation. The Mona Lisa is the work of a man who had used those skills to immerse himself in a lifetime of intellectual passions. The inquiries chronicled on his thousands of notebook pages—of light rays striking curved objects, dissections of human faces, geometrical volumes being transformed into new shapes, flows of turbulent water, the analogies between the earth and human bodies—had helped him fathom the subtleties of depicting motion and emotion. “His insatiable curiosity, his restless leaps from one subject to another, have been harmonized in a single work,” Kenneth Clark wrote of the Mona Lisa. “The science, the pictorial skill, the obsession with nature, the psychological insight are all there, and so perfectly balanced that at first we are hardly aware of them.”1

Fig. 134. The Mona Lisa.





THE COMMISSION


Vasari provided a vivid description of the Mona Lisa in his life of Leonardo, first published in 1550. Facts were not Vasari’s forte, and it is unlikely that he ever saw the painting (though it is conceivable that he could have if Salai had brought it back to Milan after Leonardo’s death, as the confusing inventory of his estate made in 1525 possibly suggests, before it was sold to the king of France). It is more probable that Vasari had seen, at best, a copy or was writing from secondhand descriptions and allowing himself some literary license. Whatever the case, subsequent discoveries have tended to confirm much of his account, so it provides a good starting point for chronicling the masterpiece:

Leonardo undertook to paint, for Francesco del Giocondo, the portrait of Mona Lisa, his wife. . . . Whoever wished to see how nearly art could imitate nature was able to comprehend it when he saw this portrait. . . . The eyes had that luster and watery sheen which are seen in life, and around them were rosy and pearly tints, together with the eyelashes, that cannot be represented without the greatest subtlety. . . . The nose, with its beautiful nostrils, rosy and tender, appeared to be alive. The mouth, with its opening, and with the ends united by the red of the lips to the flesh tints of the face, seemed in truth to be not colors but flesh. In the pit of the throat, if one gazed upon it most intensely, could be seen the beating of the pulse.

Vasari was referring to Lisa del Giocondo, who was born in 1479 into a minor branch of the distinguished Gherardini family, whose roots as landowners stretched from feudal times but whose money had not survived quite so long. At fifteen, she married into the wealthy but not quite so prominent Giocondo family, which had made its riches in the silk trade. Her father had to cede one of their farms as a dowry since they had little cash, but the marriage between frayed landed gentry and rising merchant class turned out to be beneficial to all concerned.

Her new husband, Francesco del Giocondo, had lost his first wife eight months earlier and had a two-year-old son to raise. Having become the purveyor of silks to the Medici, he was increasingly prosperous, with clients throughout Europe, and he bought a few women Moors from North Africa to serve as his household slaves. From all indications he was in love with Lisa, which was not usually a factor in the arrangement of such marriages. He helped support her family, and by 1503 she had borne him two sons. Until then they had been living at his parents’ house, but with a growing family and financial prospects he bought a home of their own and around that time commissioned Leonardo to paint a portrait of his wife, who was turning twenty-four.2

Why did Leonardo accept the assignment? He was at the time fending off the incessant pleadings of the far wealthier and more prominent art patron Isabella d’Este, and he was so engrossed in his scientific explorations that he was known to pick up a brush only reluctantly.

Perhaps one reason Leonardo accepted was out of family friendship. His father had long served as a notary for Francesco del Giocondo and had represented him in legal disputes several times. Their families shared a close connection to the church of Santissima Annunziata. Leonardo had moved into the church’s cloistered complex with his entourage three years earlier, when he returned to Florence from Milan. His father was the notary for the church, and Francesco del Giocondo worshipped there, lent it money, and would eventually endow a family chapel. Given his nature as a sharp and sometimes contentious merchant, Giocondo occasionally got into disputes with the church, and it fell to Piero da Vinci to work them out. One of them in 1497 involved a bill from Giocondo that the friars of Santissima Annunziata disputed; Piero drew up a settlement in the Giocondo silk workshop.3

So the aging Piero, then seventy-six, likely had his hand in helping to arrange for his famous son to accept the commission. In addition to doing a favor for a family friend and client, Piero was probably also looking after his son. Although Leonardo was now widely celebrated as an artist and engineer, he had begun to withdraw regularly from his bank account the savings he had brought with him from Milan.

But I suspect the main reason that Leonardo decided to paint Lisa del Giocondo is that he wanted to paint her. Because she was somewhat obscure, not a famed noble or even the mistress of one, he could portray her as he wished. There was no need to cater to or take directions from a powerful patron. Most important, she was beautiful and enticing—and she had an alluring smile.





BUT IS IT REALLY LISA?


The assertion by Vasari and others, including the sixteenth-century Florentine writer Raffaello Borghini, that the Mona Lisa is a portrait of Lisa del Giocondo seems straightforward. Vasari knew Francesco and Lisa, who were still alive when he made numerous visits to Florence between 1527 and 1536, and he became friends with their children, who likely were the source for some of his information. When the first edition of his book was printed in 1550, the children were still alive, and Vasari lived diagonally across from the church complex of Santissima Annunziata. If he was incorrect about Lisa being the subject of the painting, there were a lot of her family members and friends who could have corrected him for his second edition in 1568. Yet even though he made a lot of other corrections, the Mona Lisa story remained the same.4

But this being Leonardo, there have been some mysteries and disputes. Questions arose even before Leonardo finished the painting. In 1517 he was visited at his studio in France by Antonio de Beatis, secretary to Cardinal Luigi of Aragon, who recorded in his diary that he saw three paintings: Saint John the Baptist, the Virgin and Child with Saint Anne, and a portrait of “a certain Florentine lady.” So far, so good. De Beatis apparently was told this by Leonardo, which would comport with the portrait’s not being of some rich marchesa or notable mistress, whom de Beatis might know, but of a person such as Lisa del Giocondo, who was not famous enough to mention by name.

There follows, however, a confusing sentence. The painting, de Beatis reported, was “done from life at the instigation [instantia] of the late Giuliano de’ Medici.” This is baffling. When Leonardo started the painting, Giuliano had not yet moved to Rome or become Leonardo’s patron. In 1503 he had been exiled by the republican leaders of Florence and was living in Urbino and Venice. If Giuliano “instigated” the portrait, might it have been of one of his mistresses, as some have suggested? But none of his known mistresses was a “Florentine lady,” and the ones he had were famous enough that de Beatis would have recognized them if any were the model for the painting.

There is, however, a plausible and delightful possibility that Giuliano was somehow involved in urging Leonardo to paint or keep working on a portrait of Lisa del Giocondo. Giuliano and Lisa were born the same year, 1479, and knew each other through their interrelated families in the small world of the Florentine elite. Among other connections, Lisa’s stepmother was Giuliano’s cousin. Lisa and Giuliano were both fifteen when he was forced to leave Florence, and a few months later she married the older widower Francesco. Perhaps, as in a Shakespeare play, they were star-crossed lovers. Giuliano may have been Lisa’s pining teenage lover or, as Bernardo Bembo was to Ginevra de’ Benci, a wistfully Platonic one. Perhaps when Leonardo passed through Venice in 1500, Giuliano asked him to report back, when he got to Florence, on how the beautiful Lisa was faring and what she now looked like. He may have even expressed the desire for a portrait of her. Or, when Leonardo arrived in Rome with the painting unfinished, his new patron Giuliano may have recognized its potential universal beauty and urged him to complete it. These explanations need not replace the narrative that Francesco del Giocondo commissioned the painting. Instead they could supplement it, perhaps add a reason Leonardo accepted the assignment, and even help explain why he never actually delivered the painting to Francesco.5

Another wrinkle in the narrative is that the name Mona Lisa, a contraction of “Madonna (Madam) Lisa,” which was widely adopted based on Vasari’s account, is not the only name used for the painting. It is also called La Gioconda (in French, La Joconde). That is how it, or a copy of it, was listed in the settlement of Salai’s estate in 1525,6 which seems to strengthen the case that the Mona Lisa and La Gioconda are one and the same. It would be a pun on her last name, which would appeal to Leonardo; the word means “jocund” or “jocular.” But some have argued that there might be two different paintings, citing the fact that Lomazzo, writing in the 1580s, mentioned “the portrait of La Gioconda and Mona Lisa,” as if they were separate works. Various theorists have scurried down rabbit holes trying to figure out who the jocund lady might be if she is not the Mona Lisa. It’s more likely, however, either that Lomazzo was mistaken or that an early transcription of his text substituted “and” for “or” in his sentence.7

What should put an end to any mystery or confusion is the evidence discovered in 2005, mentioned earlier in my discussion of the Saint Anne chronology, of the note scribbled by Agostino Vespucci in 1503 in the margin of an edition of Cicero, which mentions “the head of Lisa del Giocondo” as one of the paintings Leonardo was working on at the time.8 Sometimes, even with Leonardo, what seems like a mystery isn’t. Instead, a straightforward explanation suffices. I am confident that is true in this case. The Mona Lisa is Mona Lisa. It is Lisa del Giocondo.

That said, the painting became more than a portrait of a silk-merchant’s wife and certainly more than a mere commission. After a few years, and perhaps from the outset, Leonardo was painting it as a universal work for himself and for eternity rather than for Francesco del Giocondo.9 He never delivered the painting and, judging from his bank records, never collected any money for it. Instead, he kept it with him in Florence, Milan, Rome, and France until he died, sixteen years after he began. Over that period, he added thin layer after layer of little glaze strokes as he perfected it, retouched it, and imbued it with new depths of understanding about humans and nature. Some new insight, new appreciation, new inspiration would strike him, and the brush would alight gently on the poplar panel yet again. As it was with Leonardo, who became more profoundly layered with each step of his journey, so it was with the Mona Lisa.





THE PAINTING


The mysterious allure of the Mona Lisa begins with Leonardo’s preparation of its wood panel. On a thin-grained plank cut from the center of a trunk of poplar, larger than usual for a household portrait, he applied a thick primer coat of lead white rather than a more typical mix of gesso, chalk, and white pigment. That undercoat, he knew, would be better at reflecting back the light that made it through his fine layers of translucent glazes and thereby enhance the impression of depth, luminosity, and volume.10

As a result, light penetrates the layers, and some of it reaches the white undercoat to be reflected back through the layers. Our eyes see an interplay between light rays that bounce from the colors on the surface and those that dance back from the depths. This creates shifting and elusive subtleties of modeling. The contours of her cheeks and smile are created by soft transitions of tone that seem veiled by the glaze layers, and they vary as the light in the room and the angle of our gaze changes. The painting comes alive.

Like the fifteenth-century Netherlandish painters such as Jan van Eyck, Leonardo used glazes that had a very small proportion of pigment mixed into the oil. For the shadows on Lisa’s face, he pioneered the use of an iron and manganese mix to create a pigment that was burnt umber in color and absorbed oil well. He applied it with brushstrokes so delicate that they are imperceptible, brushing on, over time, up to thirty fine layers. “The thickness of a brown glaze placed over the pink base of the Mona Lisa’s cheek grades smoothly from just two to five micrometers to around thirty micrometers in the deepest shadow,” according to an X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy study published in 2010. That analysis showed that the strokes were applied in an intentionally irregular way that serves to make the grain of the skin look more lifelike.11

Leonardo shows Lisa sitting on a loggia, the base of its columns barely visible at the edges, with her hands folded in the foreground, resting on the arm of her chair. Her body and especially her hands feel unusually close to us, while the jagged mountain landscape recedes into a faraway and misty distance. An analysis of the underpainting shows that he initially drew her left hand grasping the chair arm as if she were about to rise, but then thought better of it. Nevertheless, she still appears to be in motion. We have caught her in the act of turning, as if we had just walked onto the loggia and captured her attention. Her torso twists slightly as her head rotates to look and smile directly at us.

Throughout his career, Leonardo had immersed himself in the study of light, shade, and optics. In a passage in his notebooks, he wrote an analysis that comports closely to the way he let light strike Lisa’s face: “When you want to make a portrait, do it in dull weather, or as evening falls. Note in the streets, as evening falls, the faces of the men and women, and when the weather is dull, what softness and delicacy you may perceive in them.”12

In the Mona Lisa, he made the light shine from on high and slightly from the left. To do this, he had to resort to a little sleight of hand, but he did it so subtly that it takes some scrutiny to notice. Judging from the columns, the loggia on which she is sitting is covered; therefore, the light should be coming from the landscape behind her. Instead, it shines on her from the front. Perhaps we are meant to think that the loggia is open on its side, but even that would not explain the full effect. It’s an artificial arrangement employed by Leonardo to allow him to use his mastery of shading to create the contours and modeling he needs. His understanding of optics and how light strikes curved surfaces is so brilliant, so convincing, that his trick in the Mona Lisa is not conspicuous.13

There is another small anomaly about the way light strikes Lisa’s face. In his optics writings, Leonardo was studying how long it takes the pupils of an eye to become smaller when exposed to more light. In the Musician, the eyes are dilated differently in a way that gives the painting a sense of movement and accords with Leonardo’s use of bright light in that painting. In the Mona Lisa, the pupil of her right eye is slightly larger. But that eye is (and was before her turn) the one more directly facing the source of light, which comes from her right, and thus that pupil should be smaller. Was this, like the lack of refractions in the orb of Salvator Mundi, a lapse? Or some clever trick? Was Leonardo observant enough to notice a case of anisocoria, in which one eye is more dilated than the other, which occurs in 20 percent of humans? Or was it that he knew that pleasure also causes eyes to widen and was indicating, by showing one of her eyes dilating faster than the other, that Lisa was pleased to see us?

Then again, maybe this is being too obsessive about a tiny, perhaps irrelevant, observation. Call it the Leonardo Effect. His skill of observation was so acute that even an obscure anomaly in his paintings, such as an uneven dilation of pupils, causes us to wrestle, perhaps too much, with what he might have noticed and thought. If so, it is a good thing. By being around him, viewers are stimulated to observe the little details of nature, like the cause of a dilated pupil, and to regain our sense of wonder about them. Inspired by his desire to notice every detail, we try to do the same.

Also a bit puzzling is the issue of Lisa’s eyebrows, or lack thereof. In Vasari’s fulsome description, he makes a point of lavishing praise on them: “The eyebrows, because he has shown the manner in which the hairs spring from the flesh, growing thickly in one place and lightly in another and curving according to the pores of the skin, could not be more natural.” That seems to be another example of Vasari’s effusiveness and of Leonardo’s brilliant combination of art, observation, and anatomy—until we notice that Mona Lisa has no eyebrows. Indeed, a description of the painting from 1625 notes that “this lady, in other respects beautiful, is almost without eyebrows.” This has fueled some of the farfetched theories that the painting now in the Louvre is a different work than the one Vasari saw.

One explanation is that Vasari never saw the painting and embellished parts of his account, as he was wont to do. But his description is so precise that this seems improbable. A more plausible explanation is based on what seems to be two faint and blurry oblong patches where the eyebrows should have been, which suggest that they were painted as Vasari described, each hair meticulous, but Leonardo took so long to do them that he painted them over a layer of oil that had completely dried. This would mean that the first time the painting was cleaned, they could have been wiped away. This explanation was supported in 2007 by high-resolution scans made by the French art technician Pascal Cotte. Using light filters, he found tiny indications of eyebrows that originally existed.14

Although Lisa is sparsely adorned, without the jewels or fancy costuming that would indicate aristocratic status, her clothing is rendered with dazzling care and scientific astuteness. Ever since he was an apprentice drawing drapery studies in Verrocchio’s studio, Leonardo had been observant of the folds and flows of fabric. Her dress billows gently, the light catching the vertical waves and pleats. Most noticeable are the mustard-copper sleeves, rippling and shining with a silky luster that would have dazzled Verrocchio.

Because he was painting a portrait that, at least in theory, was for a merchant of the finest silk, it’s not surprising that he included delightful details in Lisa’s layers of clothing. To appreciate the exquisite care that Leonardo took, look at an enlarged high-resolution reproduction, many of which can be found in books and online,15 and study the neckline of her dress. It begins with two rows of braided spirals, the pattern in nature most beloved by Leonardo, between which are interlocked golden rings that catch the light as if in three-dimensional relief. The next row is a series of knots, like those Leonardo loved to draw in his notebooks. They form the shape of crosses, each separated by two hexagonal coils. But there is one place, in the center of the neckline of the dress, where the pattern is slightly broken and there seem to be three hexagonals in a row. Only on very close examination of high-resolution and infrared images does it become clear that Leonardo did not make a mistake; instead, he was very subtly depicting a fold in the bodice right below her cleavage. The infrared images reveal something that is likewise amazing but also, because we are dealing with Leonardo, not surprising: he painted the embroidered patterns on the bodice even in the places where he would later cover it by painting another layer of garment, so that we can faintly sense its presence even where we cannot see it.16

Covering Lisa’s hair is a gossamer veil, worn as a mark of virtue (not mourning), which is so transparent that it would be almost unnoticeable were it not for the line it makes across the top of her forehead. Look carefully at how it drapes loosely over her hair near her right ear; it is evident that Leonardo was meticulous enough to paint the background landscape first and then used almost-transparent glazes to paint the veil over it. Also look at where her hair comes out from under her veil at her right forehead. Although the veil is almost transparent, the hair underneath is painted to look a tiny bit gauzier and lighter than the hair flowing from underneath it and covering her right ear. When the unveiled hair cascades over her chest on both sides, Leonardo is back to creating the swirling curls he adored.

Depicting veils came naturally to Leonardo. He had a fingertip feel for the elusive nature of reality and the uncertainties of perception. Understanding that light hits multiple points on the retina, he wrote that humans perceive reality as lacking razor-sharp edges and lines; instead, we see everything with a sfumato-like softness of the edges. This is true not only of the misty landscape stretching out to infinity; it applies even to the outlines of Lisa’s fingers that seem so close we think we can touch them. We see everything, Leonardo knew, through a veil.

The portrayal of the landscape behind Lisa contains other tricks of the eye. We see it from high above, as if from a bird’s-eye view. The geological formations and misty mountains incorporate a mix, as did much of what Leonardo produced, of science and fantasy. The barren jaggedness evokes prehistoric eons, but it is connected to the present by a faint arched bridge (perhaps a depiction of the thirteenth-century Ponte Buriano over the Arno River near Arezzo)17 spanning the river just above Lisa’s left shoulder.

The horizon on the right side seems higher and more distant than the one on the left, a disjuncture that gives the painting a sense of dynamism. The earth seems to twist like Lisa’s torso does, and her head seems to cock slightly when you shift from focusing on the left horizon to the right horizon.

The flow of the landscape into the image of Lisa is the ultimate expression of Leonardo’s embrace of the analogy between the macrocosm of the world and the microcosm of the human body. The landscape shows the living and breathing and pulsing body of the earth: its veins as rivers, its roads as tendons, its rocks as bones. More than being merely the backdrop for Lisa, the earth flows into her and becomes a part of her.

Follow with your eye the winding path of the river on the right as it passes under the bridge; it seems to flow into the silky scarf draped over her left shoulder. The scarf’s folds are straight until they reach her breast, where they start gently twisting and twirling in a way that looks almost exactly like Leonardo’s drawings of water flows. On the left side of the picture, the winding road coils as if it will connect to her heart. Her dress just below the neckline ripples and flows down her torso like a waterfall. The background and her garments have the same streaked highlights, reinforcing what has progressed from being an analogy into a union. This is the heart of Leonardo’s philosophy: the replication and relationships of the patterns of nature, from the cosmic to the human.

More than that, the painting conveys this unity not only across nature but across time. The landscape shows how the earth and its offspring have been shaped and carved and replenished by flows, from the distant mountains and valleys created eons ago, through the bridges and roads created during human history, to the pulsing throat and inner currents of a young Florentine mother. And thus she is transported into an icon that is eternal. As Walter Pater wrote in his famous effusion of praise of the Mona Lisa in 1893, “Hers is the head upon which all the ends of the world are come . . . a perpetual life, sweeping together ten thousand experiences.”18





THE EYES AND THE SMILE


There are many portraits, including Leonardo’s earlier La Belle Ferronnière, in which the subject’s eyes appear to move as the viewer moves. It works even with a good reproduction of that painting or of the Mona Lisa. Stand in front, and the subject is staring at you; move from side to side, and the stare still seems direct. Even though Leonardo was not the first to create the appearance that the eyes of a portrait are following you around the room, the effect is so closely associated with him that it is sometimes called “the Mona Lisa effect.”

Dozens of experts have studied the Mona Lisa to determine the scientific reasons for this effect. One is that in the three-dimensional real world, shadows and light on a face shift as our vantage changes, but in a two-dimensional portrait this is not the case. Consequently, we have the perception that eyes staring straight out are looking at us, even if we are not directly in front of the painting. Leonardo’s mastery of shadows and lighting helps make the phenomenon more pronounced in the Mona Lisa.19

And finally, there is the Mona Lisa’s most mystical and engaging element of all: her smile. “In this work of Leonardo,” wrote Vasari, “there was a smile so pleasing that it was more divine than human.” He even told a tale of how Leonardo kept the real Lisa smiling during the portrait sessions: “While painting her portrait, he employed people to play and sing for her, and jesters to keep her merry, to put an end to the melancholy that painters often succeed in giving to their portraits.”

There is a mystery to the smile. As we stare, it flickers. What is she thinking? Our eyes move a bit, and her smile seems to change. The mystery compounds. We look away, and the smile lingers in our minds, as it does in the collective mind of humanity. Never in a painting have motion and emotion, the paired touchstones of Leonardo’s art, been so intertwined.

At the time when he was perfecting Lisa’s smile, Leonardo was spending his nights in the depths of the morgue under the hospital of Santa Maria Nuova, peeling the flesh off cadavers and exposing the muscles and nerves underneath. He became fascinated about how a smile begins to form and instructed himself to analyze every possible movement of each part of the face and determine the origin of every nerve that controls each facial muscle. Tracing which of those nerves are cranial and which are spinal may not have been necessary for painting a smile, but Leonardo needed to know.

The Mona Lisa’s smile makes it worth revisiting the remarkable page of anatomical drawings from around 1508, discussed in chapter 27, that shows a pair of lips in an open-mouth grimace and then drawn pursed (fig. 111). The muscle that purses the lips is the same muscle that forms the lower lip, he discovered. Pucker your lower lip and you can see that this is true; it can pucker on its own, with or without the upper lip, but it is impossible to pucker the upper lip alone. It was a tiny discovery, but for an anatomist who was also an artist, especially one who was in the midst of painting the Mona Lisa, it was worth noting. Other movements of the lips involve different muscles, including “those which bring the lips to a point, others which spread them, and others which curl them back, others which straighten them out, others which twist them transversely, and others which return them to their first position.” Then he drew a row of lips with the skin layer peeled off. 20 At the top of this page is something delightful: a simpler drawing of a gentle smile, sketched lightly in black chalk. Even though the fine lines at the ends of the mouth turn down almost imperceptibly, the impression is that the lips are smiling. Here amid the anatomy drawings we find the makings of Mona Lisa’s smile.

There is other science involved in the smile. From his optics studies, Leonardo realized that light rays do not come to a single point in the eye but instead hit the whole area of the retina. The central area of the retina, known as the fovea, is best at seeing color and small details; the area surrounding the fovea is best at picking up shadows and shadings of black and white. When we look at an object straight on, it appears sharper. When we look at it peripherally, glimpsing it out of the corner of our eye, it is a bit blurred, as if it were farther away.

With this knowledge, Leonardo was able to create an uncatchable smile, one that is elusive if we are too intent on seeing it. The very fine lines at the corner of Lisa’s mouth show a small downturn, just like the mouth floating atop the anatomy sheet. If you stare directly at the mouth, your retina catches these tiny details and delineations, making her appear not to be smiling. But if you move your gaze slightly away from the mouth, to look at her eyes or cheeks or some other part of the painting, you will catch sight of her mouth only peripherally. It will be a bit blurrier. The tiny delineations at the corners of the mouth become indistinct, but you still will see the shadows there. These shadows and the soft sfumato at the edge of her mouth make her lips seem to turn upward into a subtle smile. The result is a smile that flickers brighter the less you search for it.

Scientists recently found a technical way to describe all of this. “A clear smile is much more apparent in the low spatial frequency [blurrier] images than in the high spatial frequency image,” according to Harvard Medical School neuroscientist Margaret Livingstone. “Thus, if you look at the painting so that your gaze falls on the background or on Mona Lisa’s hands, your perception of her mouth would be dominated by low spatial frequencies, so it would appear much more cheerful than when you look directly at her mouth.” A study at Sheffield Hallam University showed that Leonardo used the same technique not only on La Belle Ferronnière but also on the recently discovered drawing La Bella Principessa.21

So the world’s most famous smile is inherently and fundamentally elusive, and therein lies Leonardo’s ultimate realization about human nature. His expertise was in depicting the outer manifestation of inner emotions. But here in the Mona Lisa he shows something more important: that we can never fully know true emotion from outer manifestations. There is always a sfumato quality to other people’s emotions, always a veil.





OTHER VERSIONS


Even as Leonardo was perfecting the Mona Lisa, his followers and some of his students were making copies, perhaps with an occasional helping hand from the master. Some are very good, including those known as the Vernon Mona Lisa and the Isleworth Mona Lisa, prompting claims that they may have been painted wholly or mostly by Leonardo, though most academic experts are skeptical.

Fig. 135. The Prado copy.



The most beautiful copy is one in Madrid’s Prado Museum, which was cleaned and restored in 2012 (fig. 135). It provides a glimpse of what the original looked like before its varnish became yellowed and cracked.22 In addition to showing a wispy line of eyebrows, the copy displays the vibrant copper tones of Lisa’s sleeves, the vividness of the blue-misty landscape, the gold embroidered into her neckline, the transparency of the thin shawl over her left shoulder, and the luster highlighting her ringlets of curls.

That raises the question, considered heretical by some, of whether the original Mona Lisa should be cleaned and restored, as the Louvre did its Virgin and Child with Saint Anne and Saint John the Baptist. Vincent Delieuvin, Mona Lisa’s insightful curator at the Louvre, has described the sensation he feels on the one day a year when the painting is removed from behind its glass and taken out of its frame for careful inspection. The impressions of movement are even more vibrant. He knows that just by removing most of the varnish, and not touching the paint itself, the Mona Lisa, which has gotten noticeably darker even in modern times, could be seen in more of its original glory. But the painting is such an icon, and so beloved in its varnished darkness, that even the lightest amount of cleaning would spark huge controversy. French governments have fallen over less.

Perhaps the most interesting derivatives of the Mona Lisa made by Leonardo’s followers are the seminude variations often called Monna Vanna, of which there remain at least eight, one of them attributed to Salai (fig. 136). Given that there were so many of these seminude versions done at the time, Leonardo probably approved of them, found them amusing, and may even have provided a preparatory drawing or a now-lost original. One cartoon in the Chateau of Chantilly, which is pricked as if used as the basis for a painting, is of high quality and has some left-handed hatching, indicating that Leonardo may have contributed to it and even conceived it.23

Fig. 136. The Monna Vanna.





FOR THE AGES


When the British needed to contact their allies in the French Resistance during World War II, they used a code phrase: La Joconde garde un sourire. The Mona Lisa keeps her smile. Even though it may seem to flicker, her smile contains the immutable wisdom of the ages. Her portrait is a profound expression of our human connections, both to our inner selves and to our universe.

The Mona Lisa became the most famous painting in the world not just due to hype and happenstance but because viewers were able to feel an emotional engagement with her. She provokes a complex series of psychological reactions, which she herself seems to exhibit as well. Most miraculously, she seems aware—conscious—both of us and of herself. That is what makes her seem alive, the most alive of any portrait ever painted. It is also what makes her unique, one of humankind’s unsurpassed creations. As Vasari said, “It was painted in a way to make every brave artist tremble and lose heart.”

Stand before the Mona Lisa, and the historical discussions about how it was commissioned fade into oblivion. As Leonardo worked on it for most of the last sixteen years of his life, it became more than a portrait of an individual. It became universal, a distillation of his accumulated wisdom about the outward manifestations of our inner lives and about the connections between ourselves and our world. Like Vitruvian Man standing in the square of the earth and the circle of the heavens, Lisa sitting on her balcony against the backdrop of geological eons is Leonardo’s profound meditation on what it means to be human.

And what about all of the scholars and critics over the years who despaired that Leonardo squandered too much time immersed in studying optics and anatomy and the patterns of the cosmos? The Mona Lisa answers them with a smile.





