CHAPTER 3




* * *





On His Own



L’AMORE MASCULINO


In April 1476, a week before his twenty-fourth birthday, Leonardo was accused of engaging in sodomy with a male prostitute. It happened around the time that his father finally had another child, a legitimate son who would become his heir. The anonymous allegation against Leonardo was placed in a tamburo, one of the letter drums designated for receipt of morals charges, and involved a seventeen-year-old named Jacopo Saltarelli, who worked in a nearby goldsmith shop. He “dresses in black,” the accuser wrote of Saltarelli, “is party to many wretched affairs, and consents to please those persons who request such wickedness of him.” Four young men were accused of engaging his sexual services, among them “Leonardo di Ser Piero da Vinci, who lives with Andrea de Verrocchio.”

The Officers of the Night, who policed such charges, launched an investigation and may have imprisoned Leonardo and the others for a day or so. The charges could have led to serious criminal penalties if any witnesses were willing to come forward. Fortunately, one of the other four young men was a member of a prominent family that had married into the Medici clan. The case was dismissed “with the condition that no further accusations are made.” But a few weeks later, a new accusation was made, this one written in Latin. It said that the four had engaged in multiple sexual engagements with Saltarelli. Because it too was an anonymous allegation and no witnesses came forth to corroborate it, the charges were once again set aside with the same conditions. That, apparently, was the end of the matter.1

Thirty years later, Leonardo wrote a bitter comment in a notebook: “When I made a Christ-child you put me in prison, and now if I show him grown up you will do worse to me.” The comment is cryptic. Perhaps Saltarelli had modeled for one of his depictions of a young Jesus. At the time, Leonardo felt abandoned. “As I have told you before, I am without any of my friends,” he wrote in a note. On the reverse is this: “If there is no love, what then?”2

Leonardo was romantically and sexually attracted to men and, unlike Michelangelo, seemed to be just fine with that. He made no effort either to hide or proclaim it, but it probably contributed to his sense of being unconventional, someone who wasn’t geared to be part of a family procession of notaries.

Over the years, he would have many beautiful young men as part of his studio and household. Two years after the Saltarelli incidents, on a page with one of his many notebook doodles of an older man and a beautiful boy facing each other in profile, he wrote, “Fioravante di Domenico of Florence is my most beloved friend, as though he were my . . .”3 The sentence is unfinished, but it leaves the impression that Leonardo had found an emotionally satisfying companion. Shortly after this note, the ruler of Bologna wrote to Lorenzo de’ Medici about another young man, who had worked with Leonardo and even adopted his name, Paulo de Leonardo de Vinci da Firenze.I Paulo had been sent away from Florence because of the “wicked life he had led there.”4

One of Leonardo’s earliest male companions was a young musician in Florence named Atalante Migliorotti, whom he taught to play the lyre. Atalante was thirteen in 1480, and around that time Leonardo drew what he described as “a portrait of Atalante raising his face” as well as a full-length sketch of a nude boy from behind playing the lyre.5 Two years later, Atalante would accompany him to Milan and eventually go on to a successful music career. He would star in a 1491 opera production in Mantua and then make for that city’s ruling family a twelve-stringed lyre of “unusual shape.”6

Leonardo’s most serious longtime companion, who joined Leonardo’s household in 1490, was angelic looking but devilish in personality, and thus acquired the nickname Salai, the Little Devil. Vasari described him as “a graceful and beautiful youth with fine curly hair in which Leonardo greatly delighted,” and he was the subject of many sexual comments and innuendos, as we shall see.

Leonardo was never known to have had a relationship with a woman, and he occasionally recorded his distaste for the idea of heterosexual copulation. He wrote in one of his notebooks, “The sexual act of coitus and the body parts employed for it are so repulsive that, if it were not for the beauty of the faces and the adornment of the actors and the pent-up impulse, nature would lose the human species.”7

Homosexuality was not uncommon in the artistic community of Florence or in Verrocchio’s circle. Verrocchio himself never married, nor did Botticelli, who was also charged with sodomy. Other artists who were gay included Donatello, Michelangelo, and Benvenuto Cellini (who was twice convicted of sodomy). Indeed, l’amore masculino, as Lomazzo quoted Leonardo calling it, was so common in Florence that the word Florenzer became slang in Germany for “gay.” When Leonardo worked for Verrocchio, a cult of Plato was arising among some Renaissance humanists, and it included an idealized view of erotic love for beautiful boys. Homosexual love was celebrated in both uplifting poems and bawdy songs.

Nevertheless, sodomy was a crime, as Leonardo became painfully aware, and it was sometimes prosecuted. During the seventy years following the creation of the Officers of the Night in 1432, an average of four hundred men per year were accused of sodomy, and about sixty per year were convicted and sentenced to prison, exile, or even death.8 The Church considered homosexual acts a sin. A 1484 papal bull likened sodomy to “carnal knowledge with demons,” and preachers regularly railed against it. Dante, whose Divine Comedy was beloved by Leonardo and illustrated by Botticelli, consigned sodomites, along with blasphemers and usurers, to the seventh circle of hell. However, Dante displayed Florence’s conflicted feelings about homosexuals by praising in the poem one of the denizens he put into this circle, his own mentor, Brunetto Latini.

Some writers, following Freud’s unsubstantiated assertions that Leonardo’s “passive homosexual” desires were “sublimated,” have speculated that his desires were repressed and channeled into his work. One of his maxims seems to give support to the theory that he believed in controlling his sexual urges: “Whoever does not curb lustful desires puts himself on the level of beasts.”9 But there is no reason to believe that he remained celibate. “Those who wish, in the interest of morality, to reduce Leonardo, that inexhaustible source of creative power, to a neutral or sexless agency, have a strange idea of doing service to his reputation,” wrote Kenneth Clark.10

On the contrary, in his life and in his notebooks, there is much evidence that he was not ashamed of his sexual desires. Instead he seemed amused by them. In a section of his notebooks called “On the Penis,” he described quite humorously how the penis had a mind of its own and acted at times without the will of the man: “The penis sometimes displays an intellect of its own. When a man may desire it to be stimulated, it remains obstinate and goes its own way, sometimes moving on its own without the permission of its owner. Whether he is awake or sleeping, it does what it desires. Often when the man wishes to use it, it desires otherwise, and often it wishes to be used and the man forbids it. Therefore it appears that this creature possesses a life and an intelligence separate from the man.” He found it curious that the penis was often a source of shame and that men were shy about discussing it. “Man is wrong to be ashamed of giving it a name or showing it,” he added, “always covering and concealing something that deserves to be adorned and displayed with ceremony.”11

How was this reflected in his art? In his drawings and notebook sketches, he showed a far greater fascination for the male body than the female. His drawings of male nudes tend to be works of tender beauty, many rendered in full length. By contrast, almost all of the women he painted, with the exception of a now lost Leda and the Swan, are clothed and shown from the waist up.II

Nevertheless, unlike Michelangelo, Leonardo was a master at painting women. From Ginevra de’ Benci to the Mona Lisa, his portraits of women are deeply sympathetic and psychologically insightful. His Ginevra is innovative, at least for Italy, by ushering in a three-quarter view for women’s poses rather than the full profile that was standard. This allows viewers to look at the eyes of the woman, which, as Leonardo declared, are “the window of the soul.” With Ginevra women were no longer presented as passive mannequins but were shown as people with their own thoughts and emotions.12

On a deeper level, Leonardo’s homosexuality seems to have been manifest in his sense of himself as somewhat different, an outsider who didn’t quite fit in. By the time he was thirty, his increasingly successful father was an establishment insider and a legal adviser to the Medici, the top guilds, and churches. He was also an exemplar of traditional masculinity; by then he’d had at least one mistress, three wives, and five children. Leonardo, on the contrary, was essentially an outsider. The birth of his stepsiblings reinforced the fact that he was not considered legitimate. As a gay, illegitimate artist twice accused of sodomy, he knew what it was like to be regarded, and to regard yourself, as different. But as with many artists, that turned out to be more an asset than a hindrance.





SAINT SEBASTIAN


Around the time of the Saltarelli allegations, Leonardo was working on a devotional portrait of Saint Sebastian, the third-century martyr who was tied to a tree, shot with arrows, and later clubbed to death during the Roman emperor Diocletian’s persecution of Christians. According to a list of possessions that Leonardo compiled, he drew eight studies for the work, which he apparently never painted.

The image of Sebastian was considered a protection against the plague, but he was also portrayed with homoerotic undertones by some fifteenth-century Italian artists. Vasari wrote that a Saint Sebastian portrait by Bartolommeo Bandinelli was so erotically charged that “parishioners admitted in the confessional that the beautiful nude prompted unclean thoughts.”13

The surviving Leonardo drawings of Sebastian fall into that category of being beautiful and somewhat charged. The boyish-looking saint is depicted nude with a hand tied behind him to a tree, his face filled with emotion. In one of the drawings, now in Hamburg, you can see how Leonardo wrestled with the movements and contortions and twists of Sebastian’s body, sketching his feet in different positions.14

Miraculously, one of his missing Saint Sebastian drawings turned up at the end of 2016, when a retired French doctor brought some old artworks that had been collected by his father to an auction house for appraisal. Thaddée Prate, a director at the auction house, spotted one as a possible Leonardo, an attribution that was confirmed by Carmen Bambach, a curator at New York’s Metropolitan Museum of Art. “My eyes jumped out of their sockets,” Bambach said. “The attribution is quite incontestable. My heart will always pound when I think about that drawing.” The newly discovered drawing shows Sebastian’s torso and chest modeled by Leonardo’s left-handed hatching, but as in the Hamburg version he was still trying different options for the placement of the saint’s legs and feet. “It has so many changes of ideas, so much energy in the way he explores the figure,” Bambach said. “It has a furious spontaneity. It’s like glancing over his shoulder.”15 In addition to showing us Leonardo energetically exploring ideas on paper, the discovery signifies that, even today, there are things about Leonardo that we can find anew.





ADORATION OF THE MAGI


In the accusations against him, Leonardo was described as still living in Verrocchio’s workshop. He was twenty-four, and most former apprentices would have flown their master’s nest by then. But Leonardo was not only still living with his teacher but was producing Madonnas so lacking in distinctiveness that it is hard to tell whether they were painted by him or someone else in the workshop.

Perhaps prodded by the Saltarelli affair, Leonardo finally broke away and opened a workshop of his own in 1477. Commercially, it was a failure. During the subsequent five years before he headed off to Milan, he would receive only three known commissions, one of which he never started and the other two he left unfinished. Nevertheless, even two unfinished paintings would be enough to enhance his reputation and influence the practice of art.

Leonardo’s first commission, which he received in 1478, was to paint an altarpiece for the chapel in the Palazzo della Signoria. His father served as a notary to the Signoria, Florence’s governing council, and was thus in a position to help him get the assignment. Some preparatory drawings Leonardo made indicate that he was planning to paint a scene of the shepherds who came to pay their respects to the infant Jesus in Bethlehem.16

There is no evidence that he started on the work. However, some of the sketches were inspirations for a painting that he soon began on a related theme, the Adoration of the Magi (fig. 15). It was destined to remain unfinished, but it became the most influential unfinished painting in the history of art and, in the words of Kenneth Clark, “the most revolutionary and anti-classical picture of the fifteenth century.”17 The Adoration of the Magi thus encapsulates Leonardo’s frustrating genius: a pathbreaking and astonishing display of brilliance that was abandoned once it was conceptualized.

Fig. 15. Adoration of the Magi.



The Adoration was commissioned in March 1481, when Leonardo was twenty-nine, by the monastery of San Donato, which was just outside the walls of Florence. Once again his father helped. Piero da Vinci was a notary for the monks and bought his firewood from them. That year he was given two chickens for work he had done, which included negotiating a complex contract for his son to paint the Adoration as well as to decorate the face of the monastery’s clock.18

His father was clearly worried, like the parents of many twentysomethings over the ages, about his talented child’s work habits. The monks were as well. The elaborate contract was designed to force Leonardo, already known for leaving paintings unfinished, to buckle down and produce a completed work. It stipulated that he had to supply from his own pocket “the colors, the gold and all other costs arising.” The painting had to be delivered “within thirty months at the most,” or Leonardo would be forced to forfeit whatever he had done and get no compensation. Even the payment plan was odd: Leonardo would receive some property near Florence that had been donated to the monastery, have the right to sell it back to the monastery for 300 florins, but would also have to pay a young woman’s dowry of 150 florins that had been part of the land bequest.

It was clear within three months that these badly laid plans were going awry. Leonardo was unable to pay the first installment on the dowry, and he thus went into debt to the monastery for it. He also had to borrow money to buy paint. He was paid a bundle of sticks and logs for decorating the monastery’s clock, but his account was debited for “one barrel of vermilion wine” that he got on credit.19 Thus one of history’s most creative artists found himself decorating a clock for firewood, borrowing money for paint, and cadging wine.

The scene Leonardo set out to paint in the Adoration of the Magi was one of the most popular in Renaissance Florence: the moment when the three wise men, or kings, who have followed a guiding star to Bethlehem, present the newborn Jesus with gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh. The Feast of the Epiphany, which commemorates the revelation of the divinity of Jesus Christ and the adoration of him by the Magi, was marked every January in Florence by a day of pageants and reenactments of the procession. The festivities reached a peak in 1468, when Leonardo was a fifteen-year-old apprentice working on such Medici extravaganzas. The entire city became a stage, and the processional included close to seven hundred riders, the young ones each wearing a mask carved with their father’s face.20

Many others had painted the Adoration scene, most notably Botticelli, who produced at least seven versions. His most famous was done in 1475 for a church near where Leonardo lived. Like most other versions of the scene before Leonardo, Botticelli’s were stately affairs, with dignified kings and courtly princes comporting themselves with reverence and decorum.

Botticelli, whose workshop turned out devotional Madonnas at a faster clip than even Verrocchio’s, was seven years older than Leonardo and had won far greater patronage from the Medici. He was good at courting such favor. His greatest Adoration incorporates portraits of Cosimo de’ Medici, his sons Piero and Giovanni, and his grandsons Lorenzo and Giuliano.

Leonardo was often critical of Botticelli, whose version of an Annunciation scene, painted in 1481, was probably what prompted Leonardo to write, “I recently saw an Annunciation in which the angel looked as if she wished to chase Our Lady out of the room with movement of such violence that she might have been a hated enemy; and Our Lady seemed in such despair that she was about to throw herself out of the window.”21 Leonardo later noted, correctly, that Botticelli “makes very dull landscapes” and, lacking a feel for aerial perspective, painted both close and distant trees the same shade of green.22

Despite his disdain, Leonardo closely studied Botticelli’s versions of the Adoration of the Magi and adopted some of his ideas.23 But then he set out to make one that, unlike Botticelli’s, was filled with energy, emotion, agitation, and messiness. His concept, which showed how he was influenced by pageants and public spectacles, was to produce a vortex—that spiral form he loved—centered on the infant Jesus, with a frenzied procession of at least sixty people and animals swirling around and engulfing him. This was supposed to be, after all, a tale of the Epiphany, and Leonardo wanted to convey the full power of the astonishment and awe of the wise men and accompanying throngs as they are seized by the revelation that Jesus is the Christ child, God incarnate.

Leonardo made multiple preparatory drawings, which were sketched with a stylus and then refined with a quill and ink. In them he explores various gestures, body turns, and expressions that convey a wave of emotion meant to ripple through the work. Many of the figures in his preparatory drawings are nude; he had come to believe in Alberti’s advice that an artist should build a picture of a human body from the inside out, first conceiving of the skeleton, then the skin, then the clothing.24

The most famous preparatory drawing is a sheet that lays out Leonardo’s initial conception for the entire picture (fig. 16). On it he plots his perspective lines, following the methods used by Brunelleschi and Alberti. As the scene recedes to the vanishing point, the horizontal lines, which he drew with a ruler, are compressed with incredible precision, far more than necessary for a finished painting.

Combined with this meticulous grid are quick, spectral sketches of twisting and scrambling humans, rearing and frenzied horses, and an ultimate bit of Leonardo fantasia: a resting camel twisting his neck to regard the scene with a wild surmise. Mathematically delineated, precise lines work in concert with frenzied motion and emotion. It is a remarkable combination of optical science and imaginative art, and it shows how he constructed his art on a scaffold of science.25

Fig. 16. Preparatory study for the Adoration of the Magi.



As he completed this preparatory drawing, Leonardo had his assistants assemble a large panel, eight-foot square, out of ten planks of poplar wood. Instead of using the traditional method of pricking the preparatory drawing and transferring it to the panel, Leonardo made many modifications to the design and then sketched a new version directly on the panel, which he had treated with a chalky white primer coat. This became his underdrawing.26

A technical investigation was done in 2002 for the Uffizi Museum by art analyst Maurizio Seracini, who used high-resolution scans along with ultrasound, ultraviolet, and infrared imaging techniques.27 The resulting images allow us to appreciate this superb underdrawing and the steps Leonardo took as he created his dramatic scene.

First he put a nail near the center of the panel, right in what became the trunk of the tree, and attached a string so that he could etch perspective lines with a fine stylus onto the white priming coat. Then he drew the architectural background, which included steps leading up to a ruined ancient Roman palace, symbolizing the crumbling of classical paganism. The scientific analysis shows that the underdrawing at one point had sketches of construction workers repairing the ruins in the background.28 The little scene became a metaphorical expression of the ruined house of David, which Christ would reestablish, and of the rebirth of classical works.

Once he had completed the background, Leonardo began to work on the human figures. By using a fine-tipped black chalk to sketch them lightly, he could revise and retouch them, which allowed him to perfect the gestures until he was satisfied that they conveyed the proper emotions.

We are again lucky that Leonardo described in his notebook the artistic principles that he put into practice, in this case the use of light sketching and revisions to capture mental states. It helps us better appreciate his works as well as the thinking that went into them. “Do not draw the limbs of your figure with hard contours or the same fate will happen to you as has happened to many painters who wished every little stroke of charcoal to be definite,” he advised. By drawing fixed lines, these artists create figures that “do not move their limbs in a manner that reflects the motions of their mind.” A good painter, he continued, should “decide broadly upon the position of the limbs and attend first to the movement appropriate to the mental attitudes of the creatures in the narrative.”29

When he was satisfied with his chalk sketches, Leonardo inked them with a thin brush and then filled in the proper shadows with a light blue wash. This was a departure from the brown wash he and other painters traditionally used. Through his study of optics, he knew that a dusty and misty atmosphere gave a blue tint to shadows. Once he had finished this underdrawing on the panel, he covered it with a thin layer of white primer so that it was faintly visible. Then he started, very slowly, to paint.

In the center of his composition for the Adoration of the Magi, Leonardo placed the Virgin Mary with a squirming infant Jesus on her lap. His hand reaches out, and from it the narrative swirls in a clockwise spiral. As the viewer’s eye moves around this frenzied vortex, the painting becomes not merely a moment but a dramatic narrative. Jesus is accepting a gift from one of the kings, while another of the kings, having already given his gift, is bowing his head to the ground in reverence.

Leonardo rarely featured Mary’s husband, Joseph, in his paintings, including those of the Holy Family, and it is not immediately clear in the Adoration which if any figure is supposed to be him. But Joseph is in one of Leonardo’s preparatory drawings, and it seems to me that he is the similar bald and bearded man behind Mary’s shoulder holding the lid and peering into the container of the first gift.30

Almost all the characters in the picture, the infant Jesus included, are engaged in motions that are—as they would be in The Last Supper—connected to emotions: handing a gift, opening one, bowing to the ground, slapping a forehead in amazement, pointing upward. Leaning on a rock are some younger travelers engaged in animated conversation, while just in front of them an awed onlooker raises his palm to the heavens. We are witnessing the physical and mental response, including amazement and reverence and curiosity, to an epiphany. Only the Virgin seems still, the calm in the vortex.

Portraying the swirl of characters was a daunting task, perhaps too much so. Each had to have a unique pose and set of emotions. As Leonardo later wrote in his notebook, “Do not repeat the same movements in the same figure, be it limbs, hands or fingers, nor should the same pose be repeated in one narrative painting.”31 Among the characters he originally considered were a group of fighters on horseback near the top of the picture. They appear in the preparatory sketch and the underdrawing, where they are modeled with careful shadowing, but Leonardo had trouble integrating them into the swirl. They are partly abandoned in the unfinished painting, though they foreshadow the horses he would later use in his (also unfinished) Battle of Anghiari.

The result is a whirlwind of drama and emotion. Not only did Leonardo render each of the reactions of those first beholding the Christ child, but he turned the Epiphany into a swirl in which each character is swept by the others’ emotions, and then so is the viewer.





ABANDONED


Leonardo went on to paint the sky in the Adoration of the Magi and some highlights of the human figures and parts of the architectural ruins. Then he stopped.

Why? One possible reason is that the task he undertook became overwhelming for a perfectionist. As Vasari explained about Leonardo’s unfinished works, he was stymied because his conceptions were “so subtle and so marvelous” that they were impossible to execute faultlessly. “It seemed to him that the hand was not able to attain to the perfection of art in carrying out the things which he imagined.” According to Lomazzo, the other early biographer, “he never finished any of the works he began because, so sublime was his idea of art, he saw faults even in the things that to others seemed miracles.”32

Perfecting the Adoration of the Magi must have been especially daunting. There were originally more than sixty characters in his underdrawing. As he went along, he reduced this number by turning some groups of fighters or builders in the background into fewer large-scale characters, but that still left more than thirty to be rendered. He was intent on making sure each one reacted emotionally to the others so that the painting would feel like a coherent narrative and not a random assortment of isolated characters.

Even more complex were the lighting challenges, made all the more difficult by his obsession with optics. On the bottom of a notebook page from around 1480 that shows the mechanisms of the crane that Brunelleschi used to erect Florence’s cathedral dome, Leonardo sketched a diagram of how light rays hit the surface of a human eye and are focused inside the eyeball.33 In painting the Adoration of the Magi, he wanted to convey the power of the light that shone down from heaven with the Epiphany and how each rebound of reflected light affected the coloration and gradation of each shadow. “He must have faltered at the thought of how to balance the reflections that bounce from one figure to another and to control the myriad variables of light, shade, and emotions for such a multitude,” according to the art historian Francesca Fiorani. “Unlike any other artist, he could not ignore an optical problem.”34

It was an unnerving set of iterative tasks. All thirty characters had to reflect light and project shade that would influence, and be influenced by, the light and shadows of those around them. They also had to initiate and reflect emotions, which in turn affected, and were affected by, the emotions emanating from those around them.

There was another reason, one even more fundamental, that Leonardo did not complete the painting: he preferred the conception to the execution. As his father and others knew when they drew up the strict contract for his commission, Leonardo at twenty-nine was more easily distracted by the future than he was focused on the present. He was a genius undisciplined by diligence.

He seems to have illustrated this personal trait, consciously or not, in an apparent self-portrait he drew on the far right side of the painting (figs. 2 and 15). A boyish character, pointing toward Jesus but looking away, is in the location often used by Renaissance artists to insert a likeness of themselves. (Botticelli portrays himself in the same location in his Adoration of 1475.) The boy’s nose and curls and other attributes match the description and other presumed depictions that exist of Leonardo.35

This boy is what Alberti referred to as “the commentator,” the person who is in a picture but out of it, who is not part of the action but instead connects to the world beyond the frame. His body is facing Jesus, his arm points that way, and his right foot is angled as if he had been moving in that direction. But his head is turned sharply to the left, looking toward something else, as if he had become distracted. He has paused before walking into the action. His eyes are looking far away. He is part of the scene but detached from it, an observer and commentator who is immersed but marginalized. He is, like Leonardo, of this world but apart from it.

Seven months after Leonardo was commissioned to create the painting, his payments ended. He had stopped work. When he departed Florence for Milan shortly thereafter, he left the unfinished painting with his friend Giovanni de’ Benci, the brother of Ginevra.

The monks of San Donato subsequently commissioned Botticelli’s protégé Filippino Lippi to paint a substitute. The young Lippi had learned from Botticelli the fine art of flattery; as in Botticelli’s earlier version, Lippi’s Adoration of the Magi features likenesses of many members of the Medici family. Leonardo, who lacked that instinct to cater to patrons when painting, had paid no such homage to the Medici in his unfinished Adoration or in any of his other works. That was likely one reason Botticelli, Filippino Lippi, and his father, Filippo Lippi, all enjoyed the generous Medici patronage that eluded Leonardo.

In some ways, Filippino Lippi tried to follow Leonardo’s original design in the Adoration he painted as a substitute. The kings kneel before the Holy Family with their gifts, while a cavalcade of onlookers swirl around. Lippi even includes a portrait of a commentator character on the far right, with the exact pose Leonardo had used. But Lippi’s commentator is a calm, older sage, not a dreamy and distracted young man. And even though Lippi tried to give his characters some interesting gestures, there is little of the excitement, energy, passions, or movements of the soul that Leonardo had envisaged.





SAINT JEROME IN THE WILDERNESS


Leonardo’s dedication to connecting movements of the body with movements of the soul was manifest in the other great painting he probably began around that time,36 Saint Jerome in the Wilderness (fig. 17). The unfinished work shows Saint Jerome, a fourth-century scholar who translated the Bible into Latin, during his retreat as a hermit in the desert. With an outstretched and twisted arm, he holds a rock that he will beat to his chest in penance; at his feet is the lion that became his companion after he pulled a thorn from its paw. The saint is haggard and emaciated, exuding shame as he seems to implore forgiveness, yet his eyes show his inner strength. The background is filled with Leonardo’s signature designs, including a rocky outcropping and a misty landscape.

All of Leonardo’s paintings are psychological, and all give vent to his desire to portray emotions, but none more intensely than Saint Jerome. The saint’s entire body, through its twists and uncomfortable kneeling, conveys passion. The painting also represents Leonardo’s first anatomical drawing and—as he fiddled with and revised it over the years—shows the intimate connection between his anatomical and artistic endeavors. He became typically obsessive as he carried forward Alberti’s injunction that artists should conceive a body from the inside out. Leonardo wrote, “It is necessary for the painter, in order to be good at arranging the parts of the body in attitudes and gestures which can be represented in the nude, to know the anatomy of the sinews, bones and muscles and tendons.”37

There is one puzzling detail about the anatomy in Saint Jerome, which when unpacked helps us better understand Leonardo’s art. He began work on the painting around 1480, yet it seems to accurately reflect the anatomical knowledge that he gleaned later, including from dissections he made in 1510. Most notable is the neck. In Leonardo’s early anatomical works and in a drawing he made of Judas around 1495 in preparation for The Last Supper (fig. 18), he mistakenly showed the sternocleidomastoid, which goes from the collarbone up the side of the neck, as a single muscle, when in fact it is a pair of muscles. But in his 1510 drawings based on human dissections, which are in the Royal Collection at Windsor, he would get it right (fig. 19).38 It is somewhat puzzling that his depiction of Saint Jerome, with his neck correctly showing two muscles, includes an anatomical detail that he did not know in the 1480s and discovered only in 1510.39

Fig. 17. Saint Jerome in the Wilderness.



The curator of drawings at Windsor, Martin Clayton, came up with the most convincing explanation. He posited that the painting was done in two phases, the first around 1480 and the other following the dissection studies he made in 1510. Clayton’s theory was supported by infrared analysis, which showed that the dual neck muscles were not part of the original underdrawing and that they were painted with a technique different from the other parts. “Significant parts of the modeling of the Saint Jerome were added twenty years after his first outlining of the figure,” said Clayton, “and that modeling incorporates the anatomical discoveries that Leonardo made during his dissections of the winter of 1510.”40

Fig. 18. Drawing in 1495 with neck muscle incorrect.



Fig. 19. Anatomy drawing c. 1510 with neck muscle correct.



The significance of this goes beyond helping us understand the anatomical aspects of the Saint Jerome. It shows that Leonardo’s record of unreliability was not simply because he decided to give up on certain paintings. He wanted to perfect them, so he kept hold of many of them for years, making refinements.

Even some of his commissions that were completed, or almost so—Ginevra de’ Benci and the Mona Lisa, for example—were never delivered to clients. Leonardo clung to his favorite works, carried them with him when he moved, and returned to them when he had new ideas. He certainly did that with the Saint Jerome, and he may have planned to do the same with the Adoration of the Magi, which he entrusted to Ginevra’s brother for safekeeping but never sold or gave away. He did not like to let go. That is why he would die with some of his masterpieces still near his bedside. As frustrating as it is to us today, there was a poignant and inspiring aspect to Leonardo’s unwillingness to declare a painting done and relinquish it: he knew that there was always more he might learn, new techniques he might master, and further inspirations that might strike him. And he was right.





MOTIONS OF THE MIND


Even unfinished, the Adoration of the Magi and Saint Jerome show that Leonardo was pioneering a new style that treated narrative paintings and even portraits as psychological expositions. This approach to art was partly informed by his love of pageants, theatrical productions, and court amusements; he knew how actors feign sentiments, and he recognized the tells on the lips and in the eyes of audience members that indicate their reactions. It probably also helped that the Italians, then as now, were expressive in their gestures, which Leonardo loved to capture in his notebooks.

He sought to portray not only moti corporali, the motions of the body, but also how they related to what he called “atti e moti mentali,” the attitudes and motions of the mind.41 More important, he was a master at connecting the two. This is most noticeable in his action-packed and gesture-filled narrative works, such as the Adoration and The Last Supper. But it is also the genius behind his most serene portraits, most notably the Mona Lisa.

Portraying the “motions of the mind” was not a new concept. Pliny the Elder complimented the fourth-century BC painter Aristides of Thebes by saying he was “the first to express the mentality, sentiments, character, and passions of a subject.”42 Alberti, in On Painting, emphasized the importance of the idea in a clear and crisp sentence: “Movements of the soul are made known by movements of the body.”43

Leonardo was deeply influenced by Alberti’s book, and he repeatedly echoed that injunction in his own notebooks. “The good painter has to paint two principal things, man and the intention of his mind,” he wrote. “The first is easy and the second is difficult, because the latter has to be represented through gestures and movements of the limbs.”44 He expanded on this concept in a long passage in his notes for his planned treatise on painting: “The movement which is depicted must be appropriate to the mental state of the figure. The motions and postures of figures should display the true mental state of the originator of these motions, in such a way they can mean nothing else. Movements should announce the motions of the mind.”45

Leonardo’s dedication to portraying the outward manifestations of inner emotions would end up driving not only his art but some of his anatomical studies. He needed to know which nerves emanated from the brain and which from the spinal cord, which muscles they activated, and which facial movements were connected to others. He would even try, when dissecting the brain, to figure out the precise location where the connections were made between sensory perceptions, emotions, and motions. By the end of his career, his pursuit of how the brain and nerves turned emotions into motions became almost obsessive. It was enough to make the Mona Lisa smile.





DESPAIR


Leonardo’s portrayal of emotions may have been enhanced by the fact that he was wrestling with his own inner turmoil. His inability to finish the Adoration of the Magi and Saint Jerome may have been caused by, and in turn contributed to, melancholy or depression. His notebooks from around 1480 are filled with expressions of gloom, even anguish. On a page that includes a drawing of a water clock and sundial, he lets loose a lament that touches on the sadness of unfinished work: “We do not lack devices for measuring these miserable days of ours, in which it should be our pleasure that they be not frittered away without leaving behind any memory of ourselves in the mind of men.”46 He began scribbling the same phrase over and over again, every time he needed to try a new pen nib or to fritter away a moment: “Tell me if anything was ever done . . . Tell me . . . Tell me.”47 And at one point he jotted a cry of anguish: “While I thought that I was learning how to live, I have been learning how to die.”48

Also in his notebooks from around this time are quotes from others that Leonardo found worth recording. One is from a friend who wrote a very personal poem addressed to him. “Leonardo, why so troubled?” the friend writes.49 On another page is a quote from someone named Johannes: “There is no perfect gift without great suffering. Our glories and our triumphs pass away.”50 On the same sheet is a transcription from Dante’s Inferno:

“Put off this sloth,” the master said, “for shame!

Sitting on feather-pillows, lying reclined

Beneath the blanket is no way to fame—

Fame, without which man’s life wastes out of mind,

Leaving on earth no more memorial

Than foam in water or smoke upon the wind.” 51

While he was despairing about, as he saw it, sitting on feather pillows, lying beneath the blanket, and leaving no legacy more lasting than smoke upon the wind, his rivals were enjoying great success. Botticelli, who was definitely not suffering from an inability to churn out finished work, had become the favored painter of the Medici; he was commissioned by them to do two major works, Spring and Pallas and the Centaur. In 1478 Botticelli painted a damning public depiction of the conspirators who had assassinated Giuliano de’ Medici and wounded his brother Lorenzo. When the final plotter was captured a year later, Leonardo did a careful sketch of his hanging and jotted details in his notebook, as if hoping to do a companion painting (fig. 20). But the Medici gave the commission to someone else. Botticelli was again among the chosen in 1481, when Pope Sixtus IV summoned prominent Florentine and other artists to come to Rome to fresco the walls of the Sistine Chapel; Leonardo was not selected.

As he approached his thirtieth birthday, Leonardo had established his genius but had remarkably little to show for it publicly. His only known artistic accomplishments were some brilliant but peripheral contributions to two Verrocchio paintings, a couple of devotional Madonnas that were hard to distinguish from others being produced in the workshop, a portrait of a young woman that he had not delivered, and two unfinished would-be masterpieces.

Fig. 20. The hanging of Bernardo Baroncelli.



“When a man has learned in Florence as much as he can, if he wishes to do more than live from day to day like an animal, and instead desires to become rich, he must take his departure from that place,” Vasari wrote. “For Florence treats her craftsmen as time treats its own works, which, when perfected, it destroys and consumes little by little.”52 It was time for Leonardo to move on. The fact that he was feeling consumed and was in a fragile mental state, filled with fantasies and fears, was reflected in his willingness to leave Florence and in a letter he would write to the person he hoped would be his next patron.



* * *




I. That type of name change was not uncommon for apprentices. A contemporary of Leonardo, the Florentine painter Piero di Cosimo, for example, took his name from his master, Cosimo Rosselli. Leonardo, tellingly, did not do the same and always used his own father’s name as part of his full name, Leonardo di ser Piero da Vinci.

II. Another possible exception, in addition to the probable Leda and the Swan, may have been a half-nude version of the Mona Lisa, which does not survive in his own hand but exists in versions by others in his studio. In his series of anatomical drawings, he drew a woman’s anatomy, which has a crude and flawed depiction of female genitalia, looking like a forbidding and dark cave. This was a case of not letting experience be a mistress, or vice versa.





