CHAPTER 2




* * *





Apprentice



THE MOVE


Until he was twelve, Leonardo had a life in Vinci that, despite the complexities of being part of an extended family, was quite settled. He lived primarily with his grandparents and his idle uncle Francesco in the family house in the heart of Vinci. His father and stepmother were listed as living there when Leonardo was five, but after that their primary residence was in Florence. Leonardo’s mother and her husband lived with their growing brood of children, along with Accattabriga’s parents and his brother’s family, in a farmhouse an easy walk from town.

But in 1464 this world was disrupted. His stepmother, Albiera, died in childbirth, along with what would have been her first child. Leonardo’s grandfather Antonio, the head of the Vinci household, also had recently died. So just as Leonardo was reaching the age when he needed to prepare for a trade, his father, living alone and probably lonely, brought him to Florence.1

Leonardo rarely wrote in his notebooks about his own emotions, so it is hard to know what he felt about the move. But the fables he recorded sometimes give a glimpse of his sentiments. One described the sad odyssey of a stone perched on a hill surrounded by colorful flowers and a grove of trees—in other words, a place like Vinci. Looking at the crowd of stones along the road below, it decided it wanted to join them. “What am I doing here among these plants?” the stone asked. “I want to live in the company of my fellow stones.” So it rolled down to the others. “After a while,” Leonardo recounted, “it found itself in continual distress from the wheels of the carts, the iron hoofs of horses, and the feet of the passers-by. One rolled it over, another trod upon it. Sometimes the stone raised itself up a little as it lay covered with mud or the dung of some animal, but it was in vain that it looked up at the spot whence it had come as a place of solitude and tranquil peace.” Leonardo drew a moral: “This is what happens to those who leave a life of solitary contemplation and choose to come to dwell in cities among people full of infinite evil.”2

His notebooks have many other maxims praising the countryside and solitude. “Leave your family and friends and go over the mountains and valleys into the country,” he instructed aspiring painters. “While you are alone you are entirely your own master.”3 These paeans to country living are romantic and, for those who cherish the image of lonely genius, quite appealing. But they are infused with fantasy. Leonardo would spend almost all of his career in Florence, Milan, and Rome, crowded centers of creativity and commerce, usually surrounded by students, companions, and patrons. He rarely retreated alone to the countryside for an extended period of solitude. Like many artists, he was stimulated by being with people of diverse interests and (willing to contradict himself in his notebooks) declared, “Drawing in company is much better than alone.”4 The impulses of his grandfather and uncle, who both practiced the quiet country life, were imprinted in Leonardo’s imagination but not practiced in his life.

During his early years in Florence, Leonardo lived with his father, who arranged for him to get a rudimentary education and would soon help him get a good apprenticeship and commissions. But there is one significant thing that Ser Piero did not do, which would have been easy enough for a well-connected notary: go through the legal process of having his son legitimated. This could be accomplished by the father and child appearing before a local official known as a “count palatine,” usually a dignitary who had been granted power to act on such matters, and presenting a petition as the child knelt.5 Piero’s decision not to do this for Leonardo is particularly surprising, since he then had no other children of his own.

Perhaps one reason that Piero did not legitimate Leonardo was that he hoped to have as his heir a son who would follow family tradition and become a notary, and it was already clear, by the time Leonardo turned twelve, that he was not so inclined. According to Vasari, Piero noticed that his son “never ceased drawing and sculpting, pursuits which suited his fancy more than any other.” In addition, the notary guild had a rule, which may have been difficult to circumvent, that denied membership even to out-of-wedlock sons who had been legitimated. So Piero apparently saw no reason to go through the process. By not legitimating Leonardo, he could hope to have another son who would be his heir as a notary. A year later Piero married the daughter of another prominent Florence notary, but it would only be after his third marriage, in 1475 to a woman six years younger than Leonardo, that he would produce a legitimate heir who indeed became a notary.





FLORENCE


There was no place then, and few places ever, that offered a more stimulating environment for creativity than Florence in the 1400s. Its economy, once dominated by unskilled wool-spinners, had flourished by becoming one that, like our own time, interwove art, technology, and commerce. It featured artisans working with silk makers and merchants to create fabrics that were works of art. In 1472 there were eighty-four wood-carvers, eighty-three silk workers, thirty master painters, and forty-four goldsmiths and jewelry craftsmen working in Florence. It was also a center of banking; the florin, noted for its gold purity, was the dominant standard currency in all of Europe, and the adoption of double-entry bookkeeping that recorded debits and credits permitted commerce to flourish. Its leading thinkers embraced a Renaissance humanism that put its faith in the dignity of the individual and in the aspiration to find happiness on this earth through knowledge. Fully a third of Florence’s population was literate, the highest rate in Europe. By embracing trade, it became a center of finance and a cauldron of ideas.

“Beautiful Florence has all seven of the fundamental things a city requires for perfection,” the essayist Benedetto Dei wrote in 1472, when Leonardo was living there. “First of all, it enjoys complete liberty; second, it has a large, rich, and elegantly dressed population; third, it has a river with clear, pure water, and mills within its walls; fourth, it rules over castles, towns, lands and people; fifth, it has a university, and both Greek and accounting are taught; sixth, it has masters in every art; seventh, it has banks and business agents all over the world.”6 Each one of those assets was valuable for a city, just as they are today: not only the “liberty” and “pure water,” but also that the population was “elegantly dressed” and that the university was renowned for teaching accounting as well as Greek.

The city’s cathedral was the most beautiful in Italy. In the 1430s it had been crowned with the world’s largest dome, built by the architect Filippo Brunelleschi, which was a triumph of both art and engineering, and linking those two disciplines was a key to Florence’s creativity. Many of the city’s artists were also architects, and its fabric industry had been built by combining technology, design, chemistry, and commerce.

This mixing of ideas from different disciplines became the norm as people of diverse talents intermingled. Silk makers worked with goldbeaters to create enchanted fashions. Architects and artists developed the science of perspective. Wood-carvers worked with architects to adorn the city’s 108 churches. Shops became studios. Merchants became financiers. Artisans became artists.7

When Leonardo arrived, Florence’s population was 40,000, which is about what it had been for a century but down from the 100,000 or so who lived there in 1300, before the Black Death and subsequent waves of plague. There were at least a hundred families that could be considered very wealthy, plus some five thousand guild members, shopkeepers, and merchants who were part of a prosperous middle class. Because most of them were new to wealth, they had to establish and assert their status. They did so by commissioning distinctive works of art, buying luxurious clothes of silk and gold, building palatial mansions (thirty went up between 1450 and 1470), and becoming patrons of literature, poetry, and humanist philosophy. Consumption was conspicuous but tasteful. By the time Leonardo arrived, Florence had more wood-carvers than butchers. The city itself had become a work of art. “There is no place more beautiful in all the world,” the poet Ugolino Verino wrote.8

Unlike some city-states elsewhere in Italy, Florence was not ruled by hereditary royalty. More than a century before Leonardo arrived, the most prosperous merchants and guild leaders crafted a republic whose elected delegates met at the Palazzo della Signoria, now known as the Palazzo Vecchio. “The people were kept amused every day by shows, festivals, and novelties,” the fifteenth-century Florentine historian Francesco Guicciardini wrote. “They were well fed from the provisions with which the city abounded. Industry of every sort flourished. Talented and able men were maintained, and a welcome and a position secured to all teachers of literature, art, and every liberal pursuit.”9

The republic was not, however, democratic or egalitarian. In fact, it was barely a republic. Exercising power from behind its façade was the Medici family, the phenomenally wealthy bankers who dominated Florentine politics and culture during the fifteenth century without holding office or hereditary title. (In the following century they became hereditary dukes, and lesser family members became popes.)

After Cosimo de’ Medici took over the family bank in the 1430s, it became the largest in Europe. By managing the fortunes of the continent’s wealthy families, the Medici made themselves the wealthiest of them all. They were innovators in bookkeeping, including the use of debit-and-credit accounting that became one of the great spurs to progress during the Renaissance. By means of payoffs and plotting, Cosimo became the de facto ruler of Florence, and his patronage made it the cradle of Renaissance art and humanism.

A collector of ancient manuscripts who had been schooled in Greek and Roman literature, Cosimo supported the rebirth of interest in antiquity that was at the core of Renaissance humanism. He founded and funded Florence’s first public library and the influential but informal Platonic Academy, where scholars and public intellectuals discussed the classics. In art, he was a patron of Fra Angelico, Filippo Lippi, and Donatello. Cosimo died in 1464, just as Leonardo arrived in Florence from Vinci. He was succeeded by his son and then, five years later, his famous grandson, Lorenzo de’ Medici, aptly dubbed Lorenzo the Magnificent.

Lorenzo had been tutored in humanist literature and philosophy under the watchful eye of his mother, an accomplished poet, and he patronized the Platonic Academy, launched by his grandfather. He was also an accomplished sportsman, distinguishing himself in jousting, hunting, falconry, and breeding horses. All of this made him a better poet and patron than he was a banker; he took more delight in using wealth than in making it. During his twenty-three-year reign, he would sponsor innovative artists, including Botticelli and Michelangelo, as well as patronize the workshops of Andrea del Verrocchio, Domenico Ghirlandaio, and Antonio del Pollaiuolo, which were producing paintings and sculptures to adorn the booming city.

Lorenzo de’ Medici’s patronage of the arts, autocratic rule, and ability to maintain a peaceful balance of power with rival city-states helped to make Florence a cradle of art and commerce during Leonardo’s early career there. He also kept his citizenry amused with dazzling public spectacles and grandly produced entertainments, ranging from Passion Plays to pre-Lenten carnivals. The work done for these pageants was ephemeral, but it was lucrative and stimulated the creative imagination of many of the artists involved, most notably young Leonardo.

Florence’s festive culture was spiced by the ability to inspire those with creative minds to combine ideas from disparate disciplines. In narrow streets, cloth dyers worked next to goldbeaters next to lens crafters, and during their breaks they went to the piazza to engage in animated discussions. At the Pollaiuolo workshop, anatomy was being studied so that the young sculptors and painters could better understand the human form. Artists learned the science of perspective and how angles of light produce shadows and the perception of depth. The culture rewarded, above all, those who mastered and mixed different disciplines.





BRUNELLESCHI AND ALBERTI


The legacy of two such polymaths had a formative influence on Leonardo. The first was Filippo Brunelleschi (1377–1446), the designer of the cathedral dome. Like Leonardo, he was the son of a notary. Desiring a more creative life, he trained to become a goldsmith. Fortunately for his wide-ranging interests, goldsmiths were lumped together with other artisans as members of the guild of silk weavers and merchants, which also included sculptors. Brunelleschi’s interests soon embraced architecture as well, and he traveled to Rome to study classical ruins with his friend Donatello, another young Florentine goldsmith, who later achieved fame as a sculptor. They measured the Pantheon dome, studied other great buildings, and read the works of ancient Romans, most notably Vitruvius’s paean to classical proportions, De Architectura. Thus they became embodiments of the multidisciplinary interests and rebirth of classical knowledge that shaped the early Renaissance.

To build his cathedral dome—a self-supporting structure of close to four million bricks that is still the largest masonry dome in the world—Brunelleschi had to develop sophisticated mathematical modeling techniques and invent an array of hoists and other engineering tools. In an example of the diverse forces that were animating creativity in Florence, some of these hoists were then used to stage Lorenzo de’ Medici’s magnificent theatrics involving flying characters and moving scenery.10

Brunelleschi also rediscovered and greatly advanced the classical concepts of visual perspective, which had been missing in the art of the Middle Ages. In an experiment that foreshadowed the work of Leonardo, he painted a panel that depicted the view of the Florence Baptistery across the plaza from the cathedral. After drilling a small hole in the panel, he put the back of it up to his eye while he faced the Baptistery. Then he took a mirror and held it at arm’s length, reflecting back on the painting. As he moved the mirror in and out of his line of sight, he would compare the reflection of his painting to the real Baptistery. The essence of realistic painting, he thought, was to render a three-dimensional view onto a two-dimensional surface. After accomplishing this trick on a painted panel, Brunelleschi showed how parallel lines seemed to converge in the distance toward a vanishing point. His formulation of linear perspective transformed art and also influenced the science of optics, the craft of architecture, and the uses of Euclidean geometry.11

Brunelleschi’s successor as a theorist of linear perspective was another of the towering Renaissance polymaths, Leon Battista Alberti (1404 –1472), who refined many of Brunelleschi’s experiments and extended his discoveries about perspective. An artist, architect, engineer, and writer, Alberti was like Leonardo in many ways: both were illegitimate sons of prosperous fathers, athletic and good-looking, never-married, and fascinated by everything from math to art. One difference is that Alberti’s illegitimacy did not prevent him from being given a classical education. His father helped him get a dispensation from the Church laws barring illegitimate children from taking holy orders or holding ecclesiastical offices, and he studied law at Bologna, was ordained as a priest, and became a writer for the pope. During his early thirties, Alberti wrote his masterpiece analyzing painting and perspective, On Painting, the Italian edition of which was dedicated to Brunelleschi.

Alberti had an engineer’s instinct for collaboration and, like Leonardo, was “a lover of friendship” and “open-hearted,” according to the scholar Anthony Grafton. He also honed the skills of courtiership. Interested in every art and technology, he would grill people from all walks of life, from cobblers to university scholars, to learn their secrets. In other words, he was much like Leonardo, except in one respect: Leonardo was not strongly motivated by the goal of furthering human knowledge by openly disseminating and publishing his findings; Alberti, on the other hand, was dedicated to sharing his work, gathering a community of intellectual colleagues who could build on each other’s discoveries, and promoting open discussion and publication as a way to advance the accumulation of learning. A maestro of collaborative practices, he believed, according to Grafton, in “discourse in the public sphere.”

When Leonardo was a teenager in Florence, Alberti was in his sixties and spending much of his time in Rome, so it is unlikely they spent time together. Alberti was a major influence nonetheless. Leonardo studied his treatises and consciously tried to emulate both his writing and his demeanor. Alberti had established himself as “an avatar of grace in every word or movement,” a style that very much appealed to Leonardo. “One must apply the greatest artistry in three things,” Alberti wrote, “walking in the city, riding a horse, and speaking, for in each of these one must try to please everyone.”12 Leonardo mastered all three.

Alberti’s On Painting expanded on Brunelleschi’s analysis of perspective by using geometry to calculate how perspective lines from distant objects should be captured on a two-dimensional pane. He also suggested that painters hang a veil made of thin thread between themselves and the objects they are painting, then record where each element falls on the veil. His new methods improved not only painting but endeavors ranging from mapmaking to stage designs. By applying mathematics to art, Alberti elevated the painter’s status and advanced the argument that the visual arts deserve a standing equal to that of other humanist fields, a cause that Leonardo would later champion.13





EDUCATION


Leonardo’s only formal learning was at an abacus school, an elementary academy that emphasized the math skills useful in commerce. It did not teach how to formulate abstract theories; the focus was on practical cases. One skill that was emphasized was how to draw analogies between cases, a method that Leonardo would use repeatedly in his later science. Analogies and spotting patterns became for him a rudimentary method of theorizing.

His enthusiastic early biographer Vasari wrote, with what seems to be typical exaggeration, “In arithmetic, during the few months that he studied it, he made so much progress, that, by continually suggesting doubts and difficulties to the master who was teaching him, he would very often bewilder him.” Vasari also noted that Leonardo was interested in so many things that he got easily distracted. He turned out to be good in geometry, but he never mastered the use of equations or the rudimentary algebra that existed at the time. Nor did he learn Latin. In his thirties he would still be trying to remedy this deficiency by drawing up lists of Latin words, painstakingly writing out awkward translations, and wrestling with grammar rules.14

A left-hander, Leonardo wrote from right to left on a page, the opposite direction of the words on this and other normal pages, and drew each letter facing backward. “They are not to be read save with a mirror,” as Vasari described these pages. Some have speculated that he adopted this script as a code to keep his writings secret, but that is not true; it can be read, with or without a mirror. He wrote that way because when using his left hand he could glide leftward across the page without smudging the ink. The practice was not completely uncommon. When his friend the mathematician Luca Pacioli described Leonardo’s mirror writing, he made the point that some other left-handers wrote likewise. A popular fifteenth-century calligraphy book even shows left-handed readers the best way to do lettera mancina, or mirror script.15

Being left-handed also affected Leonardo’s method of drawing. As with his writing, he drew from right to left so as not to smudge the lines with his hand.16 Most artists draw hatching strokes that slope upward to the right, like this: ////. But Leonardo’s hatching was distinctive because his lines started on the lower right and moved upward to the left, like this: \\. Today this style has an added advantage: the left-handed hatching in a drawing is evidence that it was made by Leonardo.

When viewed in a mirror, Leonardo’s writing is somewhat similar to that of his father, indicating that Piero probably helped Leonardo learn to write. However, many of his numerical calculations are written in conventional fashion, showing that the abacus school probably did not indulge his use of mirror script for math.17 Being left-handed was not a major handicap, but it was considered a bit of an oddity, a trait that conjured up words like sinister and gauche rather than dexterous and adroit, and it was one more way in which Leonardo was regarded, and regarded himself, as distinctive.





VERROCCHIO


Around the time Leonardo was fourteen, his father was able to secure for him an apprenticeship with one of his clients, Andrea del Verrocchio, a versatile artist and engineer who ran one of the best workshops in Florence. Vasari wrote, “Piero took some of his drawings and carried them to Andrea del Verrocchio, who was his good friend, and asked if he thought it would be profitable for the boy to study drawing.” Piero knew Verrocchio well, and he notarized at least four legal settlements and rental documents for him around this time. But Verrocchio probably gave the boy an apprenticeship on merit, not just as a favor to his father. He was, Vasari reported, “astonished” at the boy’s talent.18

Verrocchio’s workshop, which was nestled in a street near Piero’s notarial office, was the perfect place for Leonardo. Verrocchio conducted a rigorous teaching program that involved studying surface anatomy, mechanics, drawing techniques, and the effects of light and shade on material such as draperies.

When Leonardo arrived, Verrocchio’s workshop was creating an ornate tomb for the Medici, sculpting a bronze statue of Christ and Saint Thomas, designing banners of white taffeta gilded with flowers of silver and gold for a pageant, curating the Medici’s antiques, and generating Madonna paintings for merchants who wanted to display both their wealth and their piety. An inventory of his shop showed that it had a dining table, beds, a globe, and a variety of books in Italian, including translated classical poetry by Petrarch and Ovid as well as humorous short stories by the fourteenth-century popular Florentine writer Franco Sacchetti. The topics of discussion in his shop included math, anatomy, dissection, antiquities, music, and philosophy. “He applied himself to the sciences, and particularly geometry,” according to Vasari.19

Verrocchio’s bottega, like those of his five or six main competitors in Florence, was more like a commercial shop, similar to the shops of the cobblers and jewelers along the street, than a refined art studio. On the ground floor was a store and workroom, open to the street, where the artisans and apprentices mass-produced products from their easels, workbenches, kilns, pottery wheels, and metal grinders. Many of the workers lived and ate together in the quarters upstairs. The paintings and objects were not signed; they were not intended to be works of individual expression. Most were collaborative efforts, including many of the paintings commonly attributed to Verrocchio himself. The goal was to produce a constant flow of marketable art and artifacts rather than nurture creative geniuses yearning to find outlets for their originality.20

With their lack of Latin schooling, the artisans in such shops were not considered to be part of the cultural elite. But the status of artists was beginning to change. The rebirth of interest in the ancient Roman classics had revived the writings of Pliny the Elder, who extolled classical artists for representing nature so accurately that their grapes could fool birds. With the help of the writings of Alberti and the development of mathematical perspective, the social and intellectual standing of painters was rising, and a few were becoming sought-after names.

Trained as a goldsmith, Verrocchio left much of the brushwork of painting to others, most notably a crop of young artists that included Lorenzo di Credi. Verrocchio was a kind master; students such as Leonardo often continued to live with and work for him after their apprenticeships were completed, and other young painters, including Sandro Botticelli, became part of his circle.

Verrocchio’s collegial nature did have one downside: he was not a tough taskmaster and his workshop was not renowned for delivering commissions on time. Vasari noted that Verrocchio once made preparatory drawings for a battle scene of nude figures and other narrative works of art, “but for some reason, whatever it may have been, they remained unfinished.” Verrocchio held on to some paintings for years before completing them. Leonardo would far exceed his master in all things, including in his propensity to get distracted, walk away from projects, and linger over paintings for years.

One of Verrocchio’s most captivating sculptures was a four-foot bronze of the young warrior David standing in triumph over the head of Goliath (fig. 1). His smile is tantalizing and a bit mysterious—What exactly is he thinking?—like the ones Leonardo would later paint. It quavers between expressing a childlike glory and a dawning realization of future leadership; a cocky smile is caught in the moment of being transformed into resolution. Unlike Michelangelo’s iconic marble statue of a muscular David as a man, Verrocchio’s David seems to be a slightly effeminate and strikingly pretty boy of about fourteen.

Fig. 1. Verrocchio’s David.



Fig. 2. Presumed self-portrait by Leonardo in the Adoration of the Magi.



Fig. 3. Drawing possibly of Leonardo modeling for Verrocchio’s David.



That was the age of Leonardo, newly apprenticed in the studio, when Verrocchio probably began work on the statue.21 Artists of Verrocchio’s era typically blended the classical ideal with more naturalistic features, and it is unlikely that his statues are exact portraits of a particular model. Nevertheless there are reasons to think that Leonardo posed for Verrocchio’s David.22 The face is not the usual broad type that Verrocchio had previously favored. He clearly used a new model, and the recently arrived boy in the shop was the obvious candidate, especially because, according to Vasari, young Leonardo had “a beauty of body beyond description, a splendor that rejoiced the most sorrowful souls.” Such praises of young Leonardo’s loveliness are echoed by his other early biographers. Another piece of evidence: David’s face is similar (strong nose and chin, soft cheeks and lips) to that of a young boy Leonardo drew on the edge of the Adoration of the Magi that is presumed to be a self-portrait (fig. 2) as well as other supposed likenesses.

So with just a little imagination, we can look at Verrocchio’s transfixing statue of the pretty boy David and envision what the young Leonardo looked like when he stood modeling on the ground floor of the studio. In addition, there is a drawing by one of Verrocchio’s students that is probably a copy of a study made for the statue. It shows the boy model in exactly the same pose, down to his finger placement on his hip and the little hollow where his neck hits his collarbone, but nude (fig. 3).

Verrocchio’s art was sometimes criticized as workmanlike. “The style of his sculpture and painting tended to be hard and crude, since it came from unremitting study rather than any inborn gift,” Vasari wrote. But his statue of David is a beautiful gem that influenced the young Leonardo. David’s curls and those of the hair and beard of Goliath’s head are luxurious spirals of the type that would become a signature feature of Leonardo’s art. In addition, Verrocchio’s statue (unlike, say, Donatello’s version in 1440) displays a care and mastery of anatomical details. For example, the two veins visible in David’s right arm are accurately rendered and pop in just the precise way to show that, despite his seeming nonchalance, he is gripping his dagger-like sword very tightly. Likewise, the muscle connecting David’s left forearm to his elbow is flexed in a way that comports with the twisting of his hand.

That ability to convey the subtleties of motion in a piece of still art was among Verrocchio’s underappreciated talents, one that Leonardo would adopt and then far surpass in his paintings. More than most previous artists, Verrocchio imbued his statues with twists, turns, and flows. In his bronze Christ and Saint Thomas, begun while Leonardo was an apprentice, Saint Thomas turns to his left to touch the wound of Jesus, who is twisting to his right as he lifts his arm. The sense of motion turns the statue into a narrative. It conveys not merely a moment but a story, the one told in the Gospel of John, when Thomas doubts the resurrection of Jesus and responds to his injunction “Reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side.” Kenneth Clark called it “the first instance in the Renaissance of that complicated flow of movement through a composition, achieved by contrasted axes of the figures, which Leonardo made the chief motif of all his constructions.”23 We can also see Verrocchio’s love of movement and flow in the hair of Saint Thomas and beard of Jesus, which again feature a sensuous profusion of spiraling curls and tight coils.

Leonardo had studied the use of math for commercial purposes at his abacus school, but from Verrocchio he learned something more profound: the beauty of geometry. After Cosimo de’ Medici died, Verrocchio designed a marble-and-bronze slab for his tomb, which was finished in 1467, a year after Leonardo became his apprentice. Instead of religious imagery, the tomb slab featured geometrical patterns dominated by a circle inside a square, as Leonardo would use for his drawing Vitruvian Man. Inside the design, Verrocchio and his workshop carved carefully proportioned rectangles and half-circles in colors that were based on harmonic ratios and the Pythagorean musical scale.24 There was harmony in proportions, Leonardo learned, and math was nature’s brushstroke.

Geometry and harmony combined again two years later, when Verrocchio’s studio was given a monumental engineering task: mounting a two-ton ball on top of Brunelleschi’s dome of Florence’s cathedral. It was a triumph of both art and technology. The crowning moment, which was accompanied by trumpet fanfare and hymns of praise, occurred in 1471, when Leonardo was nineteen. The project, which he would still refer to decades later in his notebook, ingrained in him a sense of the interplay between artistry and engineering; he made loving, meticulous drawings of the hoists and gear mechanisms that Verrocchio’s studio used, some of which had originally been devised by Brunelleschi.25

The construction of the ball, which was made of stone that was clad with eight sheets of copper and then gilded, also kindled in Leonardo a fascination with optics and the geometry of light rays. There were no welding torches at the time, so the triangular sheets of copper had to be soldered together using concave mirrors, about three feet wide, that would concentrate sunlight into a point of intense heat. An understanding of geometry was needed to calculate the precise angle of the rays and grind the curve of the mirrors accordingly. Leonardo became mesmerized—at times obsessed—by what he called “fire mirrors”; over the years he would make almost two hundred drawings in his notebooks that show how to make concave mirrors that will focus light rays from varying angles. Close to forty years later, when working in Rome on huge curved mirrors that might turn the heat of the sun into a weapon, he jotted in his notebook, “Remember how the ball of Santa Maria del Fiore was soldered together in sections?”26

Leonardo was also influenced by Verrocchio’s primary commercial competitor in Florence, Antonio del Pollaiuolo. Even more than Verrocchio, Pollaiuolo was experimenting with the expression of moving and twisting bodies, and he performed surface dissections of humans to study anatomy. He was, wrote Vasari, “the first master to skin many human bodies in order to investigate the muscles and understand the nude in a more modern way.” In his engraving Battle of the Nudes and his sculpture and painting Hercules and Antaeus, Pollaiuolo depicted warriors contorted in powerful yet realistic ways as they struggle to stab or subdue each other. The anatomy of muscles and nerves informs the grimaces on faces and the twists of limbs.27

Leonardo’s father came to appreciate, and in one case profit from, his son’s fevered imagination and ability to connect art to the wonders of nature. A peasant who worked in Vinci one day made a small shield of wood and asked Piero to take it to Florence and have it painted. Piero gave the task to Leonardo, who decided to create a terrifying image of a dragon-like monster breathing fire and belching poison. To make it naturalistic, he assembled parts from real lizards, crickets, snakes, butterflies, grasshoppers, and bats. “He labored over it so long that the stench of the dead animals was past bearing, but Leonardo did not notice it, so great was the love that he bore towards art,” Vasari wrote. When Piero finally came to get it, he recoiled in shock from what in the dim light appeared at first to be a real monster. Piero decided to keep his son’s creation and buy another shield for the peasant. “Later, Ser Piero sold the buckler of Leonardo secretly to some merchants in Florence, for a hundred ducats; and in a short time it came into the hands of the Duke of Milan, having been sold to him by the merchants for three hundred ducats.”

The shield, perhaps Leonardo’s first recorded piece of art, displayed his lifelong talent for combining fantasy with observation. In the notes for his proposed treatise on painting, he would later write, “If you wish to make an imaginary animal invented by you appear natural, let us say a dragon, take for the head that of a mastiff or hound, for the eyes a cat, and for the ears a porcupine, and for the nose a greyhound, and the brows of a lion, the temple of an old cock, the neck of a terrapin.”28





DRAPERIES, CHIAROSCURO, AND SFUMATO


One of the exercises in Verrocchio’s studio was the drawing of “drapery studies,” most done with delicate brushstrokes of black and white washes on linen. According to Vasari, Leonardo “would make clay models of figures, draping them with soft pieces of cloth dipped in plaster, and would then draw them patiently on thin sheets of cambric or linen, in black and white, with the point of the brush.” The velvety renderings of the folds and waves of drapery featured deft depictions of light, nuanced gradations of shadow, and the occasional glint of luster (fig. 4).

Some of the drapery drawings from Verrocchio’s studio appear to be studies for paintings. Others were probably done just as learning exercises. The drawings have given rise to a vibrant academic industry that tries to sort out which were done by Leonardo and which were more likely by Verrocchio, Ghirlandaio, or their coworkers.29 The fact that the attributions are difficult to resolve is evidence of the collegial nature of Verrocchio’s bottega.

Fig. 4. Drapery study from Verrocchio’s studio, attributed to Leonardo, c. 1470.



For Leonardo, the drapery studies helped foster one of the key components of his artistic genius: the ability to deploy light and shade in ways that would better produce the illusion of three-dimensional volume on a two-dimensional surface. They also helped him hone his ability to observe how light subtly caresses an object, causing a glistening of luster, a sharpened contrast on a fold, or a hint of reflected glow creeping into the heart of a shadow. “The first intention of the painter,” Leonardo later wrote, “is to make a flat surface display a body as if modeled and separated from this plane, and he who surpasses others in this skill deserves most praise. This accomplishment, with which the science of painting is crowned, arises from light and shade, or we may say chiaroscuro.”30 That statement could stand as his artistic manifesto, or at least a key element of it.

Chiaroscuro, from the Italian for “light/dark,” is the use of contrasts of light and shadow as a modeling technique for achieving the illusion of plasticity and three-dimensional volume in a two-dimensional drawing or painting. Leonardo’s version of the technique involved varying the darkness of a color by adding black pigments rather than making it a more saturated or richer hue. In his Benois Madonna, for example, he painted the Virgin Mary’s blue dress in shades ranging from almost white to almost black.

When mastering drapery drawings in Verrocchio’s studio, Leonardo also pioneered sfumato, the technique of blurring contours and edges. It is a way for artists to render objects as they appear to our eye rather than with sharp contours. This advance caused Vasari to proclaim Leonardo the inventor of the “modern manner” in painting, and the art historian Ernst Gombrich called sfumato “Leonardo’s famous invention, the blurred outline and mellowed colors that allow one form to merge with another and always leave something to our imagination.”31

The term sfumato derives from the Italian word for “smoke,” or more precisely the dissipation and gradual vanishing of smoke into the air. “Your shadows and lights should be blended without lines or borders in the manner of smoke losing itself in the air,” he wrote in a series of maxims for young painters.32 From the eyes of his angel in the Baptism of Christ to the smile of the Mona Lisa, the blurred and smoke-veiled edges allow a role for our own imagination. With no sharp lines, enigmatic glances and smiles can flicker mysteriously.





WARRIORS WITH HELMETS


In 1471, around the time the copper ball was placed atop the Duomo, Verrocchio & Co. was involved, as were most of the other artisans of Florence, in the festivities organized by Lorenzo de’ Medici for the visit of Galeazzo Maria Sforza, the cruel and authoritarian (and soon-to-be-assassinated) Duke of Milan. Accompanying Galeazzo was his swarthy and charismatic younger brother Ludovico Sforza, who was nineteen, the same age as Leonardo. (It was to him that Leonardo would address his famous job-seeking letter eleven years later.) Verrocchio’s shop had two major tasks for the festivities: redecorating the Medici’s guest quarters for the visitors and crafting a suit of armor and an ornate helmet as a gift.

The Duke of Milan’s cavalcade was dazzling even to Florentines who were used to Medicean public spectacles. It included two thousand horses, six hundred soldiers, a thousand hunting hounds, falcons, falconers, trumpeters, pipers, barbers, dog trainers, musicians, and poets.33 It’s hard not to admire an entourage that travels with its own barbers and poets. Because it was Lent, there were three religious spectacle plays in place of public jousts and tournaments. But the overall atmosphere was far from Lenten. The visit marked the climax of the Medici practice of using public pageants and spectacles to dissipate popular discontent.

To Machiavelli, who wrote a history of Florence in addition to his famous how-to manual for authoritarian princes, the penchant for pageantry was related to a decadence that infected Florence during its period of relative peace, when Leonardo was a young artist there: “The youth having become more dissolute than before, more extravagant in dress, feasting, and other licentiousness, and being without employment, wasted their time and means on gaming and women; their principal study being how to appear splendid in apparel, and attain a crafty shrewdness in discourse. These manners derived additional encouragement from the followers of the duke of Milan, who, with his duchess and the whole ducal court, came to Florence, where he was received with pomp and respect.” One church burned to the ground during the festivities, which was considered divine retribution for the fact that, as Machiavelli wrote, “during Lent, when the church commands us to abstain from animal food, the Milanese, without respect for either God or his church, ate of it daily.”34

Leonardo’s most famous early drawing may have been inspired by or related to this visit by the Duke of Milan.35 It is of a craggy Roman warrior in profile wearing an ornate helmet (fig. 5), and it was derived from a drawing by Verrocchio, whose studio had designed a helmet as one of Florence’s gifts to the duke. Intricately drawn with a silverpoint stylus on tinted paper, Leonardo’s warrior sports a helmet adorned by a frightfully realistic bird wing and the flourishes of curls and spirals that he adored. On the breastplate is a ludicrous but loveable growling lion. The warrior’s face is subtly modeled with delicate shadings made by patiently drawn hatch lines, but his jowls and brows and lower lip are exaggerated to the edge of caricature. The hooked nose and jutting jaw create a profile that became a leitmotif in Leonardo’s drawings, that of a gruff old warrior, noble but faintly farcical.

Fig. 5. A warrior.



The influence of Verrocchio can be clearly seen. From Vasari’s Lives we know that Verrocchio created sculptured reliefs of “two heads in metal, one representing Alexander the Great in profile, and the other a fanciful portrait of Darius,” the ancient Persian king. These are now lost but are known through various copies made at the time. Most notably, in Washington, DC’s National Gallery there is a marble relief of a young Alexander the Great, attributed to Verrocchio and his workshop, which features a similar ornate helmet with a winged dragon, a breastplate adorned with a roaring face, and the profusion of curls and fluttering swirls that the master imparted to his apprentice. In his own drawing, Leonardo eliminated a large-jawed animal that Verrocchio had perched atop the helmet, turned the dragon into swirls of plants, and generally made the design less complicated. “What Leonardo’s simplifications achieved was to make the beholder’s eye focus on the profile heads of the warrior and lion, i.e., on the relationship between the man and the animal,” according to Martin Kemp and Juliana Barone.36

As with his paired carvings of Darius and Alexander, Verrocchio occasionally juxtaposed a profile of a craggy old warrior with that of a pretty boy, a theme that would become a favorite of Leonardo’s, both in his drawings and in random notebook doodles. One example is in Verrocchio’s Beheading of Saint John the Baptist, a silver relief he did for Florence’s Baptistery, where a young warrior and an old one are juxtaposed on the far right. By the time this sculpture was made, starting around 1477, when Leonardo was twenty-five, it is unclear who was influencing whom; the young and old warriors facing each other, as well as an angelic young boy on the far left, have the vibrant movement and emotion-laden facial expressions that make it seem possible Leonardo had a hand in them.37





PAGEANTS AND PLAYS


For the artists and engineers in Florence’s bottegas, working on the Medici pageants and spectacles was a significant component of their job. For Leonardo it was also a joy. He was already making a name as a colorful dresser, fond of brocade doublets and rose tunics, and as a showman adept at imaginative theatrics. Over the years, both in Florence and especially after he moved to Milan, he spent time devising costumes, theatrical scenery, stage machinery, special effects, floats, banners, and entertainments. His theatrical productions were ephemeral, and they linger only in sketches in his notebooks. They can be dismissed as diversions, but they were also an enjoyable way for him to combine art and engineering, and thus they became a formative influence on his personality.38

The artisans who created the sets for theatrical events became masters of the rules of artistic perspective that had been refined in the 1400s. The painted scenery and backdrops had to be unified with the three-dimensional stage settings, props, moving objects, and actors. Reality and illusions were blended. We can see the influence of these plays and pageants on both Leonardo’s art and his engineering. He studied how to make the rules of perspective work for different vantage points, loved mixing illusion with reality, and delighted in devising the special effects, costumes, scenery, and theatrical machinery. All of this helps to explain many of the sketches and fantasy writings in his notebooks that scholars sometimes find mystifying.

For example, some of the gears and cranks and mechanisms that Leonardo rendered in his notebooks were, I think, theatrical machinery that he encountered or contrived. Florentine impresarios had created ingenious mechanisms, called ingegni, for changing scenery, propelling dazzling props, and turning stages into living paintings. Vasari praises a Florentine carpenter and engineer who climaxed a festival show with a scene of “Christ carried upward from a mountain carved of wood and borne to heaven by a cloud filled with angels.”

Likewise, some of the flying contraptions that we find in Leonardo’s notebooks were probably for the amusement of theatrical audiences. The Florentine plays often involved characters and props descending from the heavens or being magically suspended in air. Some of Leonardo’s flying machines were, as we will see, clearly aimed at real human flight. Others, however, are on notebook pages from the 1480s and seem to have a theatrical purpose. They feature wings with limited range moved by cranks, and they could not possibly have been propelled into the skies by a human pilot. Similar pages include notes on how to project lights onto a scene and drawings of a hook-and-pulley system to raise actors.39

Even Leonardo’s famous drawing of an aerial screw (fig. 6), often touted as the design for the first helicopter, falls into this category of ingegni devised for a theatrical spectacle, I believe. Its spiral mechanism of linen, wire, and cane was, in theory, supposed to turn and bore upward into the air. Leonardo specified certain details, like making sure the linen has “its pores stopped up with starch,” but he showed no method for a human to operate it. It is big enough to be amusing but probably not enough to carry a human. In one model, he specified that the “axis will be made of a fine steel blade, bent by force, and when released it will turn the screw.” There were toys at the time that used similar mechanisms. Like some of his mechanical birds, the aerial screw was probably made to transport spectators’ imaginations rather than their bodies.40

Fig. 6. A flying machine, probably for the theater.





THE ARNO LANDSCAPE


Leonardo enjoyed the collegial and familial atmosphere in Verrocchio’s workshop so much that, when his apprenticeship ended in 1472, at the age of twenty, he decided to continue to work and live there. He remained on friendly terms with his father, who lived nearby with his second wife and still had no other children. When Leonardo registered as a member of the Florentine painters’ confraternity, the Compagnia di San Luca, he affirmed his relationship by signing himself “Leonardo di Ser Piero da Vinci.”

The Compagnia was not a guild but a club-like mutual aid society or fraternity. Other members who registered and paid dues in 1472 included Botticelli, Pietro Perugino, Ghirlandaio, Pollaiuolo, Filippino Lippi, and Verrocchio himself.41 The Compagnia had been in existence for a century, but it was undergoing a revitalization partly because artists were reacting against Florence’s antiquated guild system. Under the old guild structure, they were lumped into the Arte dei Medici e Speziali, which had been founded in 1197 for physicians and pharmacists. By the late 1400s they were eager to assert a more distinctive status for themselves.

Months after becoming a master painter, Leonardo escaped the bustling narrow streets and crammed workshops of Florence and took a trip back to the rolling green hills around Vinci. “I, staying with Antonio, am contented,” he scribbled in his notebook in the summer of 1473, when he was twenty-one.42 His grandfather Antonio had died, so the reference is perhaps to his mother’s husband, Antonio Buti (Accattabriga). One can picture him content as he stays with his mother and his large stepfamily in the hills just outside of Vinci; it conjures up his tale of the stone that willed itself to roll down to the crowded road but later yearned to be back up on the quiet hill.

On the reverse of that notebook page is what may be Leonardo’s earliest surviving art drawing, the shimmering start of a career of combining scientific observation with artistic sensibility (fig. 7). In his mirror script he has dated it “day of Holy Mary of the Snows on the 5th August 1473.”43 The drawing is an impressionistic panorama, sketched with quick pen strokes on paper, evoking the rocky hills and verdant valley surrounding the Arno River near Vinci. There are a few familiar landmarks from the area—a conical hill, perhaps a castle—but the aerial view seems to be, typical of Leonardo, a mix of the actual and the imagined, viewed as if by a soaring bird. The glory of being an artist, he realized, was that reality should inform but not constrain. “If the painter wishes to see beauties that would enrapture him, he is master of their production,” he wrote. “If he seeks valleys, if he wants to disclose great expanses of countryside from the summits of mountains, and if he subsequently wishes to see the horizon of the sea, he is lord of all of them.”44

Other artists had drawn landscapes as backdrops, but Leonardo was doing something different: depicting nature for its own sake. That makes his Arno Valley drawing a contender for the first such landscape in European art. The geological realism is striking: the craggy rock outcroppings eroded by the river reveal accurately rendered layers of stratified rock, a subject that was to fascinate Leonardo for the rest of his life. So, too, is the near-precision of linear perspective and the way the atmosphere blurs the distant horizon, an optical phenomenon that he would later call “aerial perspective.”

Fig. 7. Leonardo’s Arno Valley landscape, 1473.



Even more arresting is the young artist’s ability to convey motion. The leaves of the trees and even their shadows are drawn with quick curved lines that make them seem to tremble in the breeze. The water falling into a pool is made vibrant with flutters of quick strokes. The result is a delightful display of the art of observing movement.





TOBIAS AND THE ANGEL


While working as a master painter in Verrocchio’s shop during his late teens and early twenties, Leonardo contributed elements to two paintings: he was responsible for the scampering dog and shiny fish in Tobias and the Angel (fig. 8) and for the angel on the far left in the Baptism of Christ. These collaborations show what he learned from Verrocchio and how he then surpassed him.

Fig. 8. Tobias and the Angel by Verrocchio with Leonardo.



The biblical tale of Tobias, which was popular in late fifteenth-century Florence, tells of a boy who is sent by his blind father to collect a debt, accompanied by his guardian angel, Raphael. On the journey they catch a fish, the guts of which turn out to have healing powers, including that of restoring the father’s sight. Raphael was the patron saint of travelers and of the guild of physicians and apothecaries. The tale of him and Tobias was particularly appealing to the wealthy merchants who had become art patrons in Florence, especially those with traveling sons.45 Among the Florentines who painted it were Pollaiuolo, Verrocchio, Filippino Lippi, Botticelli, and Francesco Botticini (seven times).

Pollaiuolo’s version (fig. 9) was produced in the early 1460s for the church of Orsanmichele. It was well known to Leonardo and Verrocchio, who was sculpting his statue of Christ and Saint Thomas for a niche of that church’s wall. In producing his own Tobias and the Angel a few years later, Verrocchio engaged in an explicit competition with Pollaiuolo.46

The version that came out of Verrocchio’s shop includes the exact same elements as Pollaiuolo’s: Tobias and the angel walking hand in hand, a Bolognese terrier scampering alongside, Tobias holding a carp on a stick and strings, and Raphael holding a tin with the fish’s guts, all in front of a meandering river landscape with clumps of grass and clusters of trees. And yet it is a fundamentally different painting, in both its impact and detail, in ways that reveal what Leonardo was learning.

One difference is that Pollaiuolo’s version is stiff, while Verrocchio’s conveys movement. As a sculptor, he had mastered the twists and thrusts that impart dynamism to a body. His Tobias leans in as he strides, his cloak billowing out behind him while tassels and threads flutter. He and Raphael turn to each other naturally. Even the way they hold hands is more dynamic. Whereas Pollaiuolo’s faces seem vacuous, the body motions in the Verrocchio version connect to emotional expressions, conveying mental as well as physical movements.

Verrocchio, who was more of a sculptor than a painter, developed a reputation for not being a master at portraying nature. True, there is a good raptor sweeping down in his Baptism of Christ, but his way with animals was generally considered “indifferent” and “deficient.”47 So it is not surprising that to paint the fish and dog he would turn to his pupil Leonardo, whose eye for nature was proving to be astonishing. Both animals are painted on what was already a finished background landscape; we know this because, as sometimes happened with Leonardo’s experimental mixtures, his paint has become somewhat transparent.

Fig. 9. Antonio del Pollaiuolo’s Tobias and the Angel.



The shiny and shimmery scales of the fish show that Leonardo was already mastering the magic of how light strikes an object and dances to our eyes. Each scale is a gem. The sunshine coming from the top left of the picture produces a mix of light and shade and sparkle. Both behind the gill and at the front of the liquidy eye is a spot of luster. Unlike other painters, Leonardo even took care to render the blood dripping from the fish’s cut belly.

As for the dog prancing just under Raphael’s feet, it has an expression and personality that matches in its charm that of Tobias. In stark contrast to Pollaiuolo’s stiff terrier, Leonardo’s trots naturally and watches alertly. Most notable are its curls. Their painstaking design and lustrous lighting match that of the curls above Tobias’s ear, which (an analysis of the left-handed style shows) were also drawn by Leonardo.48 Swirling and flowing curls, perfectly lit and coiled, were becoming a Leonardo signature.

In this deeply pleasing and sprightly painting, we can see the power of a master-pupil collaboration. Leonardo was already an extreme observer of nature, and he was perfecting the ability to convey the effects of light on objects. Added to that, he had imbibed from Verrocchio, the master sculptor, the excitement of conveying motion and narrative.





BAPTISM OF CHRIST


The culmination of Leonardo’s collaborations with Verrocchio came in the mid-1470s with the completion of the Baptism of Christ, which shows John the Baptist pouring water over Jesus while two angels kneeling beside the River Jordan watch (fig. 10). Leonardo painted the radiant, turning angel on the far left of the scene, and Verrocchio was so awed when he beheld it that he “resolved never again to touch a brush”—or at least that’s what Vasari tells us. Even allowing for Vasari’s penchant to mythologize and trot out clichéd themes, there was probably some truth to the tale. Afterward Verrocchio never completed any new painting on his own.49 More to the point, a comparison between the parts of the Baptism of Christ that Leonardo painted with those done by Verrocchio shows why the older artist would have been ready to defer.

Fig. 10. Baptism of Christ by Verrocchio with Leonardo.



An X-ray analysis of the painting confirms that the angel on the left and much of the background landscape and the body of Jesus were painted with multiple thin layers of oil paint, the pigments highly diluted, stroked on with great delicacy and sometimes dabbed and smoothed by fingertips, a style that Leonardo was developing in the 1470s. Oil painting had come to Italy from the Netherlands, and Pollaiuolo’s workshop was using it, as was Leonardo. Verrocchio, on the contrary, never embraced the use of oils, and instead continued to use tempera, a mix of water-soluble pigments bound with egg yolks.50

The most striking trait of Leonardo’s angel is the dynamism of his pose. Shown from slightly behind in a twisted three-quarter profile, his neck turns to the right as his torso twists slightly to the left. “Always set your figures so that the side to which the head turns is not the side to which the breast faces, since nature for our convenience has made us with a neck which bends with ease in many directions,” Leonardo wrote in one of his notebooks.51 As evident in his Christ and Saint Thomas, Verrocchio was a master of depicting motion in sculptures, and Leonardo became an expert in its painterly conveyance.

A comparison of the two angels shows how Leonardo was surpassing his master. Verrocchio’s angel seems vacant, his face flat, and his only emotion seems to be a sense of wonder that he happens to find himself next to a much more expressive angel. “He seems to look with astonishment at his companion, as at a visitant from another world,” Kenneth Clark wrote, “and, in fact, Leonardo’s angel belongs to a world of the imagination which Verrocchio’s never penetrated.”52

Like most artists, Verrocchio drew lines to delineate the contours of his angel’s head and face and eyes. But in Leonardo’s angel, there are no clear edges that delineate the features. The curls dissolve gently into each other and the face, rather than creating a hairline. Look at the shadow underneath the jaw of Verrocchio’s angel, done with visible brushstrokes of tempera paint that create a sharp jaw line. Then look at Leonardo’s; the shadow is more translucent and blends more smoothly, something that’s easier done with oil. The almost imperceptible strokes are fluid, thinly layered, and occasionally smoothed by hand. The contours of the angel’s face are soft. There are no perceptible edges.

We can also see this beauty in the body of Jesus. Compare his legs, painted by Leonardo, with those of Verrocchio’s John the Baptist. The latter have sharper lines, unlike what a careful observer would see in reality. Leonardo even minutely blurs the curls of Jesus’ exposed pubic hair.

This use of sfumato, the smokiness that blurs sharp contours, was by now a hallmark of Leonardo’s art. Alberti in his treatise on painting had advised that lines should be drawn to delineate edges, and Verrocchio did just that. Leonardo took care to observe the real world, and he noticed the opposite: when we look at three-dimensional objects, we don’t see sharp lines. “Paint so that a smoky finish can be seen, rather than contours and profiles that are distinct and crude,” he wrote. “When you paint shadows and their edges, which cannot be perceived except indistinctly, do not make them sharp or clearly defined, otherwise your work will have a wooden appearance.”53 Verrocchio’s angel has this wooden appearance. Leonardo’s does not.

X-ray analysis shows that Verrocchio, with his lesser feel for nature, had originally begun the background by drawing a few rounded clumps of trees and bushes, more wooden than sylvan. When Leonardo took over, he used oils to paint a richly natural view of a languid but sparkling river flowing through rocky cliffs, echoing his Arno River drawing and foreshadowing the Mona Lisa. Other than Verrocchio’s pedestrian palm tree, the backdrop displays a magical mix of natural realism and creative fantasia.

The geological striations of the rock (except those on the far right, which someone else must have painted) are carefully rendered, though not with the subtlety that Leonardo would later display. As the scene recedes, it gradually blurs, as our eyes would naturally have it, into a hazy horizon where the blue of the sky whitens into the mists just above the hills. “The edges of the mist will be indistinct against the blue of the sky, and towards the earth it will look almost like dust blown up,” Leonardo wrote in one of his notebooks.54

In painting the background and foreground, Leonardo created the organizing theme of the picture, which is a narrative united by the meandering river. He portrayed the water’s movement with scientific mastery and spiritual profundity, imbuing it with metaphorical power as the lifeblood connecting the macrocosm of the earth and the microcosm in humans. The water flows from the heavens and distant lakes, cuts through rocks to form dramatic cliffs and smooth pebbles, and pours from the cup of the Baptist, as if connecting to the blood of his veins. Finally, it swaddles the feet of Jesus and ripples to the edge of the picture, reaching us and making us feel a part of the flow.

There is an inexorable impetus to the water’s flow, and when it is obstructed by the ankles of Jesus it forms swirls and eddies as it proceeds along its course. In these acutely observed vortexes and scientifically accurate ripples, Leonardo delights in what will become his favorite pattern: nature’s spirals. The curls flowing down his angel’s neck look like cascades of water, as if the river had flowed over his head and transformed into hair.

At the center of the picture is a small waterfall, one of many such depictions Leonardo would produce, in his paintings and notebooks, of water falling into a swirling pool or stream. Sometimes these renderings are scientific, at other times darkly hallucinatory. In this case the falling water seems sprightly; it causes splashes that prance around the eddies like Tobias’s puppy.

With the Baptism of Christ, Verrocchio went from being Leonardo’s teacher to being his collaborator. He had helped Leonardo learn the sculptural elements of painting, especially modeling, and also the way a body twists in motion. But Leonardo, with thin layers of oil both translucent and transcendent, and his ability to observe and imagine, was now taking art to an entirely different level. From the mist on the distant horizons to the shadow under the angel’s chin to the water at the feet of Christ, Leonardo was redefining how a painter transforms and transmits what he observes.





THE ANNUNCIATION


In addition to the collaborations he did with Verrocchio in the 1470s, the twentysomething Leonardo produced at least four paintings primarily on his own while working at the studio: an Annunciation, two small devotional paintings of the Madonna and Child, and a pioneering portrait of a Florentine woman, Ginevra de’ Benci.

Paintings of the Annunciation, which portray the moment when the angel Gabriel surprised the Virgin Mary by telling her that she would become the mother of Christ, were very popular in the Renaissance. Leonardo’s version depicts the announcement and reaction as a narrative occurring in a walled garden of a stately country villa as Mary looks up from reading a book (fig. 11). Although ambitious, the painting is so flawed that its attribution to Leonardo has been debated; some experts contend that it was the product of an awkward collaboration with Verrocchio and others in his shop.55 But a variety of evidence shows that Leonardo was the primary if not sole artist. He made a preparatory drawing of Gabriel’s sleeve, and the painting exhibits his trademark style of dabbing the oil paint with his hands. His finger smudges can be seen, on very close inspection, on the Virgin Mary’s right hand and on the leaves of the base of the lectern.56

Fig. 11. Leonardo’s The Annunciation.



Among the problematic elements of the picture is the bulky garden wall, which seems to be viewed from a slightly higher vantage point than the rest of the picture and distracts from the visual connection between the angel’s pointing fingers and Mary’s raised hand. It has an odd angle at its opening, which makes it look like it is being viewed from the right, and is jarring when compared to the wall of the house. The cloths covering the Virgin’s lap have a rigidity, as if Leonardo had worked on his drapery studies a little too fastidiously, and the odd configuration of what I assume is her armchair makes it seem as if she has three knees. Her pose makes her look like a mannequin, an effect that is compounded by the blankness of her expression. The flatly rendered cypress trees are the same size, yet the one on the right, next to the house, seems closer to us and thus should be bigger. A spindly trunk of one of the cypresses seems to sprout from the angel’s fingers, and the botanical exactness of the Madonna lily that the angel holds contrasts with a generic treatment of the other plants and grasses that is untypical of Leonardo.57

The most discomforting lapse involves the awkward positioning of Mary in relation to the ornate lectern, which was based on a tomb Verrocchio designed for the Medici. The lectern’s base is a few feet closer to the viewer than Mary is, which makes it seem that she is too far away for her right arm to reach the book, yet her arm extends across it, appearing oddly elongated. This is clearly the work of a young artist. The Annunciation gives us an insight into what type of painter Leonardo would have been had he not gone on to immerse himself in observations of perspective and studies of optics.

On careful examination, however, the picture is not quite as bad as it looks. Leonardo was experimenting with the trick known as anamorphosis, in which some elements of a work may look distorted when viewed straight on but appear accurate when viewed from another angle. Leonardo occasionally made sketches of the technique in his notebooks. At the Uffizi, guides will suggest that you take a few steps to the right of The Annunciation and look again. That helps, but only partly. The angel’s arm looks a bit less odd, as does the angle of the opening of the garden wall. It gets slightly better if you also squat down and view the painting from slightly lower. Leonardo was trying to create a piece that would look good to someone walking into the church from the right. He was also nudging us to the right so that we see the act of Annunciation more from Mary’s vantage.58 It almost works. His tricks of perspective display a youthful brilliance, but one that has not yet been refined.

The greatest strength of the picture is Leonardo’s depiction of the angel Gabriel. He has the androgynous beauty that Leonardo was perfecting, and his birdlike wings (ignoring the lamentable light brown extension added by someone else) grow out of his shoulders with Leonardo’s wondrous blend of naturalism and fantasy. Leonardo is able to convey Gabriel in motion: he is leaning forward, as if he has just landed, and the ribbon tied around his sleeve is fluttering back (unlike in the preparatory drawing), while the wind from his arrival stirs the grass and flowers beneath him.

Another glorious feature of The Annunciation is Leonardo’s tinting of the shadows. As the setting sun shines from the left side of the painting, it casts a pale yellow glow on the top of the garden wall and the lectern. But where the sun’s glow is blocked, the resulting shadows pick up the blue hue of the sky. The front of the white lectern has a slight blue tinge, since it is lit mainly by the refracted light of the sky rather than the yellowish direct glow of the setting sun.59 “Shadows will vary,” Leonardo explained in his notebooks. “The side of an object that receives a reflected light from the azure of the air will be tinged with that hue, and this is particularly observable in white objects. That side that receives the light from the sun will partake of that color. This may be particularly observed in the evening, when the sun is setting between the clouds, which it reddens.”60

Leonardo was helped in his subtle coloring by his growing mastery of oil paint. By using pigments that were highly diluted, he could apply them in thin translucent layers, subtly allowing the shades to evolve with each fine stroke or dabbing from his fingers. This is most notable in the face of the Virgin Mary. Bathed in the glow of the setting sun, it seems to radiate light with an incandescence not found in Gabriel’s flesh. She has a luminosity that causes her to stand out from the rest of the painting, despite her vacant expression.61

The Annunciation shows Leonardo, still in his early twenties, experimenting with light, perspective, and narratives involving human reactions. In the process, he made some mistakes. But even the mistakes, which came from innovating and experimenting, heralded his genius.





MADONNAS


Small devotional paintings and sculptures of the Madonna with the infant Jesus were a staple of the Verrocchio workshop, turned out with regularity. Leonardo did at least two such paintings, Madonna of the Carnation (fig. 12), also known as the Munich Madonna because of its current location, and the Hermitage Museum’s Madonna and Child with Flowers (fig. 13), known as the Benois Madonna after a collector who once owned it.

Fig. 12. Madonna of the Carnation (Munich Madonna).



The most interesting aspect of both is the squirming, chubby baby Jesus, whose folds of fat give Leonardo the chance to go beyond the drapery studies in using modeling, light, and shadows to convey realistic three-dimensionality. They become an early example of his use of chiaroscuro, the forceful contrasts of light and shade that use black pigments to alter the tone and brightness of pictorial elements rather than relying on the deepening color hues. “For the first time his chiaroscuro creates, throughout a picture, fully three-dimensional forms rivaling the roundness of sculpture,” wrote David Alan Brown of Washington’s National Gallery.62

Fig. 13. Madonna and Child with Flowers (Benois Madonna).



The realistic depiction of the baby Jesus in each painting is an early example of Leonardo’s art being informed by anatomical observation. “In little children, all the joints are slender and the portions between them are thick,” he wrote in his notebook. “This happens because nothing but the skin covers the joints without any other flesh and has the character of sinew, connecting the bones like a ligature. And the fat fleshiness is laid on between one joint and the next.”63 This contrast is noticeable in both pictures when comparing the wrists of the Madonna with those of the infant Jesus.

In the Munich Madonna of the Carnation, the focus of the picture is the reaction of the newborn Jesus to the flower. The actions of his chubby arms and the emotions shown on his face are connected. He sits on a cushion adorned with crystal balls, a symbol used by the Medici family and an indication that they may have commissioned the work. The landscape seen through the windows shows Leonardo’s love of combining observation with fantasy; the hazy atmospheric perspective gives a gauze of reality to jagged rocks that are purely imaginary.

The Madonna and Child with Flowers in Russia’s Hermitage Museum also shows the lively emotions and reactions that Leonardo had learned to capture in a scene, thus turning a moment into a narrative. In this case, the baby Jesus is absorbed by the cross-shaped flower Mary is handing him, as if he is, as Brown says, “a budding botanist.”64 Leonardo had been studying optics, and he depicts Jesus carefully focusing on the flower, as if he were just learning to discern the form of an object from its background. He gently guides his mother’s hands into his focus of sight. Mother and child are integrated by a narrative of reactions: that of Jesus to the flower and that of Mary delighting in the curiosity of her son.

The power of the pictures comes from the premonition that both mother and child seem to have of the crucifixion. The carnation, according to one Christian legend, sprang from the tears Mary shed at the crucifixion. In the Hermitage Museum’s Benois Madonna, the symbolism is starker; the flower itself is shaped like a cross. But the psychological impact of the pictures is disappointing. Neither one shows much emotion other than curiosity on the face of Jesus and love on the face of Mary. In Leonardo’s later variations on the theme, most notably his Madonna of the Yarnwinder and then the Virgin and Child with Saint Anne and its variations, he would turn the scene into a much more intense drama and emotional narrative.

Leonardo had two squirming baby models to observe when painting these pictures. After two childless marriages, his father married a third time, in 1475, and was promptly blessed with two sons, Antonio in 1476 and Giuliano in 1479. Leonardo’s notebooks of the time are filled with drawings and sketches of infants in various active situations: squirming with a mother, poking at a face, trying to grab objects or pieces of fruit, and (especially) grappling in many configurations with a cat. Depictions of the Madonna trying to restrain her restless baby would become an important theme in Leonardo’s art.





GINEVRA DE’ BENCI


Leonardo’s first nonreligious painting is the portrait of a melancholy young woman with a moonlike face glowing against the backdrop of a spiky juniper tree (fig. 14). Although somewhat listless and unengaging on first glance, Ginevra de’ Benci has wonderful Leonardo touches, such as the lustrous, tightly curled ringlets of hair and unconventional three-quarters pose. More important, the picture presages the Mona Lisa. As he had done in Verrocchio’s Baptism of Christ, Leonardo depicts a meandering river flowing from the misty mountains and seeming to connect to a human body and soul. With her earth-tone dress laced by blue thread, Ginevra is unified with the earth and the river that joins them.

Ginevra de’ Benci was the daughter of a prominent Florentine banker whose aristocratic family was allied with the Medici and second only to them in wealth. In early 1474, when she was sixteen, she married Luigi Niccolini, who at thirty-two was a recent widower. His family, which was in the cloth-weaving business, was politically prominent but not as wealthy; he soon became the chief magistrate of the republic, but in a 1480 tax return he declared that he had “more debts than property.” The return also said that his wife was ill and had been “in the hands of doctors for a long time,” which could account for the unnerving pallor of her complexion in the portrait.

It is likely that Leonardo’s father helped him get the commission, probably around the time of Ginevra’s 1474 marriage. Piero da Vinci had served as notary for the Benci family on many occasions, and Leonardo had become friends with Ginevra’s older brother, who lent him books and would end up as a temporary custodian of his unfinished Adoration of the Magi. But it does not seem that Ginevra de’ Benci was commissioned as a wedding or betrothal portrait. It shows a three-quarter pose rather than the side profile that was typical of the genre, and she is dressed in a starkly plain brown dress unadorned by jewelry rather than one of the elaborate dresses with luxurious jewels and brocades that was then common for an upper-class wedding painting. Her black shawl is an unlikely adornment for a celebration of a marriage.

Fig. 14. Ginevra de’ Benci.



In an oddity of Renaissance culture and mores, the picture may not have been commissioned by the Benci family but instead by Bernardo Bembo, who became Venice’s ambassador to Florence at the beginning of 1475. He was forty-two at the time and had both a wife and a mistress, but he struck up a proudly public Platonic relationship with Ginevra that made up in effusive adoration what it likely lacked in sexual consummation. This was a type of elevated romance that, at that time, was not only sanctioned but celebrated in poems. “It is with these flames and with such a love that Bembo is on fire and burns, and Ginevra dwells in the midst of his heart,” the Florentine Renaissance humanist Cristoforo Landino wrote in a verse extolling their love.65

Leonardo painted Bembo’s emblem of a laurel and palm wreath on the reverse of the portrait, and it encircles a sprig of juniper, in Italian ginepro and thus a reference to Ginevra’s name. Woven through the wreath and juniper sprig is a banner proclaiming, “Beauty Adorns Virtue,” which attests to her virtuous nature, and an infrared analysis shows Bembo’s motto, “Virtue and Honor,” had been written beneath it. Suffused with the muted and misty dusk light that Leonardo loved, the painting shows Ginevra looking pale and melancholy. There is a vacant trance-like quality to her, echoed by the dreamlike quality of the distant landscape, that seems to go deeper than merely the physical illness her husband reported.

The portrait, which is more closely focused and sculptural than others of the era, resembles a bust sculpted by Verrocchio, Lady with Flowers. The comparison would be even closer except that the bottom portion of Leonardo’s painting, perhaps as much as one-third, was at some later date lopped off, which removed what writers from the period described as gracious hands with ivory-white fingers. Fortunately we perhaps can imagine how they looked, since a silverpoint drawing by Leonardo, showing folded hands holding a sprig, which may be related to his painting, exists in the collection at Windsor.66

As with the other paintings he did in Verrocchio’s shop during the 1470s, Leonardo used thin layers of oil gently blended and blurred, sometimes with his fingers, to create smoky shadows and avoid sharp lines or abrupt transitions. If you stand close enough to the painting at the National Gallery in Washington, DC, you can see his fingerprint just to the right of Ginevra’s jaw, where her ringlets of hair blur into the background juniper tree and a distinct little spiky sprig juts out. Another can be found just behind her right shoulder.67

The most arresting features of the portrait are Ginevra’s eyes. The lids are studiously modeled to appear three-dimensional, but this also makes them feel heavy, adding to her somber demeanor. Her gaze looks distracted and indifferent, as if she’s looking through us and seeing nothing. Her right eye seems to wander to the distance. At first her gaze seems diverted and looking down and to her left. But the more you stare at each eye separately, the more each seems to focus back on you.

Also noticeable when staring at her eyes is the shiny liquid quality that Leonardo was able to achieve with his oils. Just to the right of each pupil is a tiny spot of luster, showing the sparkling glint from the sunlight coming from the front left. The same use of luster can be seen on her curls.

This perfect glint of luster—the white sparkle caused by a light hitting a smooth and shiny surface—was another of Leonardo’s signature marks. It is a phenomenon we see every day but do not often contemplate closely. Unlike reflected light, which “partakes of the color of the object,” Leonardo wrote, a spot of luster “is always white,” and it moves when the viewer moves. Look at the lustrous glimmer of the curls of Ginevra de’ Benci, then imagine walking around her. As Leonardo knew, those spots of luster would shift and “appear in as many different places on the surface as different positions are taken by the eye.”68

After you interact with Ginevra de’ Benci long enough, what at first seem like a vacant face and distant stare begin to appear suffused with a haunting tinge of emotion. She seems pensive and ruminating, perhaps about her marriage or the departure of Bembo, or because of some deeper mystery. Her life was sad; she was sickly and remained childless. But she also had an inner intensity. She wrote poetry, one line of which survives: “I ask your forgiveness; I am a mountain tiger.”69

In painting her, Leonardo created a psychological portrait, one that renders hidden emotions. That would become one of his most important artistic innovations. It set him on a trajectory that would culminate three decades later in the greatest psychological portrait in history, the Mona Lisa. The tiny hint of a smile that is visible on the right side of Ginevra’s lips would be refined into the most memorable smile ever painted. The water flowing from the distant landscape that seems to connect to the soul of Ginevra would become, in the Mona Lisa, the ultimate metaphor of the connection between earthly and human forces. Ginevra de’ Benci is not the Mona Lisa, not even close. But it is recognizably the work of the man who would paint it.





