CHAPTER 33




* * *





Conclusion



GENIUS


In the introduction to this book, I suggested that it was unhelpful to toss around the word genius as if it were a superhuman trait, bestowed by heaven and not within the ken of mere mortals. As I hope you will by now agree, Leonardo was a genius, one of the few people in history who indisputably deserved—or, to be more precise, earned—that appellation. Yet it is also true that he was a mere mortal.

The most obvious evidence that he was human rather than superhuman is the trail of projects he left unfinished. Among them were a horse model that archers reduced to rubble, an Adoration scene and battle mural that were abandoned, flying machines that never flew, tanks that never rolled, a river that was never diverted, and pages of brilliant treatises that piled up unpublished. “Tell me if anything was ever done,” he repeatedly scribbled in notebook after notebook. “Tell me. Tell me. Tell me if ever I did a thing. . . . Tell me if anything was ever made.”1

Of course, the things he did finish were enough to prove his genius. The Mona Lisa alone does that, as do all of his art masterpieces as well as his anatomical drawings. But by the end of writing this book, I even began to appreciate the genius inherent in his designs left unexecuted and masterpieces left unfinished. By skirting the edge of fantasy with his flying machines and water projects and military devices, he envisioned what innovators would invent centuries later. And by refusing to churn out works that he had not perfected, he sealed his reputation as a genius rather than a master craftsman. He enjoyed the challenge of conception more than the chore of completion.

One reason that he was reluctant to relinquish some of his works and declare them completed was that he relished a world in flux. He had an uncanny ability to convey movements—of the body and the mind, of machines and horses, and of rivers and everything else that flows. No instant, he wrote, is self-contained, just as no action in a theatrical pageant nor any drop in a flowing river is self-contained. Each moment incorporates what came right before and what is coming right after. Similarly, he looked upon his art and engineering and his treatises as a part of a dynamic process, always receptive to a refinement by the application of a new insight. He updated Saint Jerome in the Wilderness after thirty years, when his anatomy experiments taught him something new about neck muscles. If he had lived another decade, he likely would have continued to refine the Mona Lisa for that much longer. Relinquishing a work, declaring it finished, froze its evolution. Leonardo did not like to do that. There was always something more to be learned, another stroke to be gleaned from nature that would make a picture closer to perfect.

What made Leonardo a genius, what set him apart from people who are merely extraordinarily smart, was creativity, the ability to apply imagination to intellect. His facility for combining observation with fantasy allowed him, like other creative geniuses, to make unexpected leaps that related things seen to things unseen. “Talent hits a target that no one else can hit,” wrote the German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer. “Genius hits a target no one else can see.”2 Because they “think different,” creative masterminds are sometimes considered misfits, but in the words that Steve Jobs helped craft for an Apple advertisement, “While some may see them as the crazy ones, we see genius. Because the people who are crazy enough to think they can change the world are the ones who do.”3

What also distinguished Leonardo’s genius was its universal nature. The world has produced other thinkers who were more profound or logical, and many who were more practical, but none who was as creative in so many different fields. Some people are geniuses in a particular arena, such as Mozart in music and Euler in math. But Leonardo’s brilliance spanned multiple disciplines, which gave him a profound feel for nature’s patterns and crosscurrents. His curiosity impelled him to become among the handful of people in history who tried to know all there was to know about everything that could be known.

There have been, of course, many other insatiable polymaths, and even the Renaissance produced other Renaissance Men. But none painted the Mona Lisa, much less did so at the same time as producing unsurpassed anatomy drawings based on multiple dissections, coming up with schemes to divert rivers, explaining the reflection of light from the earth to the moon, opening the still-beating heart of a butchered pig to show how ventricles work, designing musical instruments, choreographing pageants, using fossils to dispute the biblical account of the deluge, and then drawing the deluge. Leonardo was a genius, but more: he was the epitome of the universal mind, one who sought to understand all of creation, including how we fit into it.





LEARNING FROM LEONARDO


The fact that Leonardo was not only a genius but also very human—quirky and obsessive and playful and easily distracted—makes him more accessible. He was not graced with the type of brilliance that is completely unfathomable to us. Instead, he was self-taught and willed his way to his genius. So even though we may never be able to match his talents, we can learn from him and try to be more like him. His life offers a wealth of lessons.

Be curious, relentlessly curious. “I have no special talents,” Einstein once wrote to a friend. “I am just passionately curious.”4 Leonardo actually did have special talents, as did Einstein, but his distinguishing and most inspiring trait was his intense curiosity. He wanted to know what causes people to yawn, how they walk on ice in Flanders, methods for squaring a circle, what makes the aortic valve close, how light is processed in the eye and what that means for the perspective in a painting. He instructed himself to learn about the placenta of a calf, the jaw of a crocodile, the tongue of a woodpecker, the muscles of a face, the light of the moon, and the edges of shadows. Being relentlessly and randomly curious about everything around us is something that each of us can push ourselves to do, every waking hour, just as he did.

Seek knowledge for its own sake. Not all knowledge needs to be useful. Sometimes it should be pursued for pure pleasure. Leonardo did not need to know how heart valves work to paint the Mona Lisa, nor did he need to figure out how fossils got to the top of mountains to produce Virgin of the Rocks. By allowing himself to be driven by pure curiosity, he got to explore more horizons and see more connections than anyone else of his era.

Retain a childlike sense of wonder. At a certain point in life, most of us quit puzzling over everyday phenomena. We might savor the beauty of a blue sky, but we no longer bother to wonder why it is that color. Leonardo did. So did Einstein, who wrote to another friend, “You and I never cease to stand like curious children before the great mystery into which we were born.”5 We should be careful to never outgrow our wonder years, or to let our children do so.

Observe. Leonardo’s greatest skill was his acute ability to observe things. It was the talent that empowered his curiosity, and vice versa. It was not some magical gift but a product of his own effort. When he visited the moats surrounding Sforza Castle, he looked at the four-wing dragonflies and noticed how the wing pairs alternate in motion. When he walked around town, he observed how the facial expressions of people relate to their emotions, and he discerned how light bounces off differing surfaces. He saw which birds move their wings faster on the upswing than on the downswing, and which do the opposite. This, too, we can emulate. Water flowing into a bowl? Look, as he did, at exactly how the eddies swirl. Then wonder why.

Start with the details. In his notebook, Leonardo shared a trick for observing something carefully: Do it in steps, starting with each detail. A page of a book, he noted, cannot be absorbed in one stare; you need to go word by word. “If you wish to have a sound knowledge of the forms of objects, begin with the details of them, and do not go on to the second step until you have the first well fixed in memory.”6

See things unseen. Leonardo’s primary activity in many of his formative years was conjuring up pageants, performances, and plays. He mixed theatrical ingenuity with fantasy. This gave him a combinatory creativity. He could see birds in flight and also angels, lions roaring and also dragons.

Go down rabbit holes. He filled the opening pages of one of his notebooks with 169 attempts to square a circle. In eight pages of his Codex Leicester, he recorded 730 findings about the flow of water; in another notebook, he listed sixty-seven words that describe different types of moving water. He measured every segment of the human body, calculated their proportional relationships, and then did the same for a horse. He drilled down for the pure joy of geeking out.

Get distracted. The greatest rap on Leonardo was that these passionate pursuits caused him to wander off on tangents, literally in the case of his math inquiries. It “has left posterity the poorer,” Kenneth Clark lamented. But in fact, Leonardo’s willingness to pursue whatever shiny subject caught his eye made his mind richer and filled with more connections.

Respect facts. Leonardo was a forerunner of the age of observational experiments and critical thinking. When he came up with an idea, he devised an experiment to test it. And when his experience showed that a theory was flawed—such as his belief that the springs within the earth are replenished the same way as blood vessels in humans—he abandoned his theory and sought a new one. This practice became common a century later, during the age of Galileo and Bacon. It has, however, become a bit less prevalent these days. If we want to be more like Leonardo, we have to be fearless about changing our minds based on new information.

Procrastinate. While painting The Last Supper, Leonardo would sometimes stare at the work for an hour, finally make one small stroke, and then leave. He told Duke Ludovico that creativity requires time for ideas to marinate and intuitions to gel. “Men of lofty genius sometimes accomplish the most when they work least,” he explained, “for their minds are occupied with their ideas and the perfection of their conceptions, to which they afterwards give form.” Most of us don’t need advice to procrastinate; we do it naturally. But procrastinating like Leonardo requires work: it involves gathering all the possible facts and ideas, and only after that allowing the collection to simmer.

Let the perfect be the enemy of the good. When Leonardo could not make the perspective in the Battle of Anghiari or the interaction in the Adoration of the Magi work perfectly, he abandoned them rather than produce a work that was merely good enough. He carried around masterpieces such as his Saint Anne and the Mona Lisa to the end, knowing there would always be a new stroke he could add. Likewise, Steve Jobs was such a perfectionist that he held up shipping the original Macintosh until his team could make the circuit boards inside look beautiful, even though no one would ever see them. Both he and Leonardo knew that real artists care about the beauty even of the parts unseen. Eventually, Jobs embraced a countermaxim, “Real artists ship,” which means that sometimes you ought to deliver a product even when there are still improvements that could be made. That is a good rule for daily life. But there are times when it’s nice to be like Leonardo and not let go of something until it’s perfect.

Think visually. Leonardo was not blessed with the ability to formulate math equations or abstractions. So he had to visualize them, which he did with his studies of proportions, his rules of perspective, his method for calculating reflections from concave mirrors, and his ways of changing one shape into another of the same size. Too often, when we learn a formula or a rule—even one so simple as the method for multiplying numbers or mixing a paint color—we no longer visualize how it works. As a result, we lose our appreciation for the underlying beauty of nature’s laws.

Avoid silos. At the end of many of his product presentations, Jobs displayed a slide of a sign that showed the intersection of “Liberal Arts” and “Technology” streets. He knew that at such crossroads lay creativity. Leonardo had a free-range mind that merrily wandered across all the disciplines of the arts, sciences, engineering, and humanities. His knowledge of how light strikes the retina helped inform the perspective in The Last Supper, and on a page of anatomical drawings depicting the dissection of lips he drew the smile that would reappear in the Mona Lisa. He knew that art was a science and that science was an art. Whether he was drawing a fetus in the womb or the swirls of a deluge, he blurred the distinction between the two.

Let your reach exceed your grasp. Imagine, as he did, how you would build a human-powered flying machine or divert a river. Even try to devise a perpetual-motion machine or square a circle using only a ruler and a compass. There are some problems we will never solve. Learn why.

Indulge fantasy. His giant crossbow? The turtle-like tanks? His plan for an ideal city? The man-powered mechanisms to flap a flying machine? Just as Leonardo blurred the lines between science and art, he did so between reality and fantasy. It may not have produced flying machines, but it allowed his imagination to soar.

Create for yourself, not just for patrons. No matter how hard the rich and powerful marchesa Isabella d’Este begged, Leonardo would not paint her portrait. But he did begin one of a silk-merchant’s wife named Lisa. He did it because he wanted to, and he kept working on it for the rest of his life, never delivering it to the silk merchant.

Collaborate. Genius is often considered the purview of loners who retreat to their garrets and are struck by creative lightning. Like many myths, that of the lone genius has some truth to it. But there’s usually more to the story. The Madonnas and drapery studies produced in Verrocchio’s studio, and the versions of Virgin of the Rocks and Madonna of the Yarnwinder and other paintings from Leonardo’s studio, were created in such a collaborative manner that it is hard to tell whose hand made which strokes. Vitruvian Man was produced after sharing ideas and sketches with friends. Leonardo’s best anatomy studies came when he was working in partnership with Marcantonio della Torre. And his most fun work came from collaborations on theatrical productions and evening entertainments at the Sforza court. Genius starts with individual brilliance. It requires singular vision. But executing it often entails working with others. Innovation is a team sport. Creativity is a collaborative endeavor.

Make lists. And be sure to put odd things on them. Leonardo’s to-do lists may have been the greatest testaments to pure curiosity the world has ever seen.

Take notes, on paper. Five hundred years later, Leonardo’s notebooks are around to astonish and inspire us. Fifty years from now, our own notebooks, if we work up the initiative to start writing them, will be around to astonish and inspire our grandchildren, unlike our tweets and Facebook posts.

Be open to mystery. Not everything needs sharp lines.





coda




* * *





Describe the tongue of the woodpecker


The tongue of a woodpecker can extend more than three times the length of its bill. When not in use, it retracts into the skull and its cartilage-like structure continues past the jaw to wrap around the bird’s head and then curve down to its nostril. In addition to digging out grubs from a tree, the long tongue protects the woodpecker’s brain. When the bird smashes its beak repeatedly into tree bark, the force exerted on its head is ten times what would kill a human. But its bizarre tongue and supporting structure act as a cushion, shielding the brain from shock.1

There is no reason you actually need to know any of this. It is information that has no real utility for your life, just as it had none for Leonardo. But I thought maybe, after reading this book, that you, like Leonardo, who one day put “Describe the tongue of the woodpecker” on one of his eclectic and oddly inspiring to-do lists, would want to know. Just out of curiosity. Pure curiosity.





ABBREVIATIONS OF FREQUENTLY CITED SOURCES


Leonardo’s Notebooks

Codex Arundel = Codex Arundel (c. 1492– c. 1518), British Library, London. Contains 238 pages taken from different original Leonardo notebooks, mainly on architecture and machinery.

Codex Ash. = Codex Ashburnham, vols. 1 (1486–90) and 2 (1490–92), l’Institut de France, Paris, formerly (and now once again) parts of Paris Mss. A and B. In the 1840s, folios 81–114 of Paris Ms. A and folios 91–100 of Paris Ms. B were stolen by Count Guglielmo Libri. He sold them to Lord Ashburnham in 1875, who returned them to Paris in 1890. J. P. Richter, in his notebook compilation, cites the Codices Ashburnham, but later literature tends to cite the folio numbers from the restored Paris Ms. A and Ms. B. (See below on the Paris manuscripts.)

Codex Atl. = Codex Atlanticus (1478–1518), Biblioteca Ambrosiana, Milan. The largest compilation of Leonardo’s papers, now arranged in twelve volumes. The folios were given new numbers in a restoration in the late 1970s. Folios are usually cited in the old style/new style.

Codex Atl./Pedretti = Carlo Pedretti, Leonardo da Vinci Codex Atlanticus: A Catalogue of Its Newly Restored Sheets (Giunti, 1978).

Codex Forster = Codex Forster, vols. 1–3 (1487–1505), Victoria and Albert Museum, London. The three volumes comprise five pocket notebooks, mainly on machinery, geometry, and the transformation of volumes.

Codex Leic. = Codex Leicester (1508–12), Bill Gates’s home near Seattle, Washington. Contains seventy-two pages mainly on the earth and its waters.

Codex Madrid = Codex Madrid, vols. 1 (1493–99) and 2 (1493–1505), Biblioteca Nacional de España, Madrid. Rediscovered in 1966.

Codex on Flight = Codex on the Flight of Birds (c. 1505), Biblioteca Reale, Turin. Originally part of Paris Ms. B. A facsimile with translation is on the website of the Smithsonian Air and Space Museum at https://airandspace.si.edu/exhibitions/codex.

Codex Triv. = Codex Trivulzianus (c. 1487–90), Castle Sforza, Milan. One of Leonardo’s earliest manuscripts, now contains fifty-five sheets.

Codex Urb. = Codex Urbinas Latinus, Vatican Library. Contains selections from various manuscripts copied and compiled by Francesco Melzi around 1530. An abbreviated version was published in Paris in 1651 as Trattato della Pittura or Treatise on Painting.

Leonardo on Painting = Leonardo on Painting, selected and translated by Martin Kemp and Margaret Walker (Yale, 2001). An anthology, based partly on the Codex Urbinas, of the writings that Leonardo intended to be in his Treatise on Painting.

Leonardo Treatise/Pedretti = Leonardo da Vinci, Libro di Pittura, edited by Carlo Pedretti, critical transcription by Carlo Vecce (Giunti, 1995). A two-volume facsimile, transcription, and anotation of the Codex Urbinas. Numbers refer to sections assigned by Pedretti.

Leonardo Treatise/Rigaud = Leonardo da Vinci, A Treatise on Painting, translated by John Francis Rigaud (Dover, 2005; originally published 1651). Based on the Codex Urbinas. Numbers refer to the numbered entries in the book.

Notebooks/Irma Richter = Leonardo da Vinci Notebooks, selected by Irma A. Richter, new edition edited by Thereza Wells with a preface by Martin Kemp (Oxford, 2008; first published 1939). Irma Richter was the daughter of J. P. Richter (see below). This edition includes her refinement and selection from her father’s work, further updated with commentary by Wells and Kemp.

Notebooks/J. P. Richter = The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci, compiled and edited by Jean Paul Richter, 2 vols. (Dover, 1970; first published in 1883). These volumes contain Italian transcriptions and English translations side by side, with many of Leonardo’s illustrations plus notes and commentary. I cite the passage numbers used by Richter, 1–1566, which remain consistent in the many editions of his seminal compilation. The two-volume dual-language Dover edition also gives the name and folio number of the original Leonardo notebook.

Notebooks/MacCurdy = Edward MacCurdy, The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci (Cape, 1938). Numerous editions are available online. Numbers refer to the passage number given by MacCurdy.

Paris Ms. = Manuscripts in l’Institut de France, which include A (written 1490–92), B (1486–90), C (1490–91), D (1508–9), E (1513–14), F (1508–13), G (1510–15), H (1493–94), I (1497–1505), K1, K2, K3 (1503–8), L (1497–1502), M (1495–1500).

Windsor = Royal Collection, Windsor Castle. The Royal Collection Inventory Number (RCIN) entries for Leonardo have a 9 before the catalogue number.

Other Frequently Cited Sources

Anonimo Gaddiano = The Anonimo Gaddiano or Anonimo Magliabecchiano, in “Life of Leonardo,” translated by Kate Steinitz and Ebria Feinblatt (Los Angeles County Museum, 1949), 37, and in Ludwig Goldscheider, Leonardo da Vinci: Life and Work (Phaidon, 1959), 28.

Arasse = Daniel Arasse, Leonardo da Vinci (Konecky, 1998).

Bambach Master Draftsman = Carmen C. Bambach, ed., Leonardo da Vinci Master Draftsman (Metropolitan Museum of New York, 2003).

Bramly = Serge Bramly, Leonardo: The Artist and the Man (HarperCollins, 1991).

Brown = David Alan Brown, Leonardo da Vinci: Origins of a Genius (Yale, 1998).

Capra Learning = Fritjof Capra, Learning from Leonardo (Berrett-Koehler, 2013).

Capra Science = Fritjof Capra, The Science of Leonardo (Doubleday, 2007).

Clark = Kenneth Clark, Leonardo da Vinci (Penguin, 1939; revised edition edited by Martin Kemp, 1988).

Clayton = Martin Clayton, Leonardo da Vinci: The Divine and the Grotesque (Royal Collection, 2002).

Clayton and Philo = Martin Clayton and Ron Philo, Leonardo da Vinci: Anatomist (Royal Collection, 2012).

Delieuvin = Vincent Delieuvin, ed., Saint Anne: Leonardo da Vinci’s Ultimate Masterpiece (Louvre, 2012). Catalogue of the exhibition at the Louvre, 2012.

Fiorani and Kim = Francesca Fiorani and Anna Marazeula Kim, “Leonardo da Vinci: Between Art and Science,” University of Virginia, March 2014, http://faculty.virginia.edu/Fiorani/NEH-Institute/essays/.

Keele and Roberts = Kenneth Keele and Jane Roberts, Leonardo da Vinci: Anatomical Drawings from the Royal Library, Windsor Castle (Metropolitan Museum of New York, 2013).

Keele Elements = Kenneth Keele, Leonardo da Vinci’s Elements of the Science of Man (Academic, 1983).

Kemp Leonardo = Martin Kemp, Leonardo (Oxford, 2004; revised 2011).

Kemp Marvellous = Martin Kemp, Leonardo da Vinci: The Marvellous Works of Nature and Man (Harvard, 1981; revised edition Oxford, 2006).

King = Ross King, Leonardo and the Last Supper (Bloomsbury, 2013).

Laurenza = Domenico Laurenza, Leonardo’s Machines (David and Charles, 2006).

Lester = Toby Lester, Da Vinci’s Ghost (Simon and Schuster, 2012).

Marani = Pietro C. Marani, Leonardo da Vinci: The Complete Paintings (Abrams, 2000).

Marani and Fiorio = Pietro C. Marani and Maria Teresa Fiorio, Leonardo da Vinci: The Design of the World (Skira, 2015). Catalogue of the Palazzo Reale exhibition, Milan, 2015.

Moffatt and Taglialagamba = Constance Moffatt and Sara Taglialagamba, Illuminating Leonardo: A Festschrift for Carlo Pedretti Celebrating His 70 Years of Scholarship (Brill, 2016).

Nicholl = Charles Nicholl, Leonardo da Vinci: Flights of the Mind (Viking, 2004).

O’Malley = Charles D. O’Malley, ed., Leonardo’s Legacy (University of California, 1969).

Payne = Robert Payne, Leonardo (Doubleday, 1978).

Pedretti Chronology = Carlo Pedretti, Leonardo: A Study in Chronology and Style (University of California, 1973).

Pedretti Commentary = Carlo Pedretti, The Literary Works of Leonardo da Vinci: Commentary (Phaidon, 1977). A two-volume set of notes and comments on Leonardo’s notebooks and J. P. Richter’s compilation.

Reti Unknown = Ladislao Reti, ed., The Unknown Leonardo (McGraw-Hill, 1974).

Syson = Luke Syson, Leonardo da Vinci, Painter at the Court of Milan (National Gallery of London, 2011).

Vasari = Giorgio Vasari, Lives of the Most Eminent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects (first published in 1550, revised in 1568). Available in multiple print and online editions. Margot Pritzker provided me with an original copy of the corrected edition and some scholarship surrounding it.

Wells = Francis Wells, The Heart of Leonardo (Springer, 2013).

Zöllner = Frank Zöllner, Leonardo da Vinci: The Complete Paintings and Drawings, 2 vols. (Taschen, 2015). Vol. 1 for paintings, vol. 2 for drawings.





About the Author




Walter Isaacson, University Professor of History at Tulane, has been CEO of the Aspen Institute, chairman of CNN, and editor of Time magazine. He is the author of The Innovators; Steve Jobs; Einstein: His Life and Universe; Benjamin Franklin: An American Life; and Kissinger: A Biography and the coauthor, with Evan Thomas, of The Wise Men: Six Friends and the World They Made.

Facebook: Walter Isaacson

Twitter: @WalterIsaacson

