CHAPTER 23




* * *





Cesare Borgia



RUTHLESS WARRIOR


Ludovico Sforza, Leonardo’s patron in Milan, had a reputation for ruthlessness that included, among other alleged acts, poisoning his nephew in order to seize the ducal crown. But Ludovico was a choir boy compared to Leonardo’s next patron, Cesare Borgia. Name any odious activity and Borgia was the master of it: murder, treachery, incest, debauchery, wanton cruelty, betrayal, and corruption. He had a brutal tyrant’s hunger for power combined with a sociopath’s thirst for blood. Once, when he felt he had been libeled, he had the offender’s tongue cut out, his right hand chopped off, and the hand with the tongue attached to its little finger hung from a church window. His only sliver of historical redemption, which is undeserved, came when Machiavelli used him as a model of cunning in The Prince and taught that his ruthlessness was a tool for power.1

Cesare Borgia was the son of the Spanish-Italian cardinal Rodrigo Borgia, soon to become Pope Alexander VI, who vies for the hotly contested title of most libertine Renaissance pope. “He had in the fullest measure all the vices of the flesh and of the spirit,” the pope’s contemporary Francesco Guicciardini wrote. He was the first pope to recognize openly his illegitimate children—ten in all, including Cesare and Lucrezia, by multiple mistresses—and he was able to get Cesare a dispensation from his illegitimacy so he could hold church offices. He made Cesare the bishop of Pamplona at fifteen and a cardinal three years later, even though the son showed less than zero predilection for piety. In fact, he had not even taken holy orders. Preferring to be a ruler rather than a religious figure, Cesare became the first person in history to fully resign from the cardinalate, and he likely had his brother stabbed to death and thrown into the Tiber so that he could replace him as the commander of the papal forces.

In that capacity, he forged an alliance with the French, and he was with King Louis XII marching into Milan in 1499. The day after their arrival, they went to see The Last Supper, and there Borgia first met Leonardo. Knowing Leonardo, it is likely that during the next few weeks he showed Borgia his military engineering designs.

Borgia subsequently launched a plan to carve out his own principality in the politically tumultuous Romagna region that stretched east of Florence to the Adriatic coast. These lands were supposed to be under his father, the pope, but the towns were controlled by their own independent princes, little tyrants, and vicars. Their violent rivalries regularly erupted into frenzied sieges and sackings accompanied by rampant rape and murder. By the spring of 1501, Borgia had conquered Imola, Forlì, Pesaro, Faenza, Rimini, and Cesena.2

Borgia next set his sights on Florence, which cowered in dread. Its treasury was depleted, and it had no military to defend it. In May 1501, as his forces neared Florence’s walls, the ruling Signoria of the city capitulated by agreeing to pay Borgia 36,000 florins a year as protection money and permitting his army to cross Florentine territory at will as he conquered more towns.





NICCOLÒ MACHIAVELLI


The bribe bought Florence peace for a year, but in June 1502 Borgia was back. As his army sacked more surrounding towns, he commanded the leaders in Florence to send a delegation to hear his latest demands. Two people were selected to try to deal with him. The elder was Francesco Soderini, a wily Church leader who led one of the anti-Medici factions in Florence. Accompanying him was the son of a bankrupt lawyer, well-educated but poor, whose writing skills and savvy understanding of power games had established him as Florence’s cleverest young diplomat: Niccolò Machiavelli.

Machiavelli had a smile right out of a Leonardo painting: enigmatic, at times laconic, always appearing to hide a secret. He shared with Leonardo the trait of being a sharp observer. He was not yet a famous author, but already he was known for his ability to produce lucid reports informed by insights into power balances, tactics, and personal motivations. He became a valued civil servant and secretary of Florence’s chancery.

As soon as he left Florence, Machiavelli received word that Borgia was in Urbino, a town east of Florence between the Apennine Mountains and Adriatic coast. Borgia had captured Urbino through trickery, by feigning friendship and then striking unexpectedly. “He arrives in one place before anyone knows he has left the other,” Machiavelli reported in a dispatch, and is able “to install himself in someone else’s house before anyone else noticed it.”

As soon as they arrived in Urbino, Soderini and Machiavelli were ushered into the ducal palace. Borgia knew how to put on a power show. He was seated in a dark room, his bearded and pockmarked face lit by a single candle. He insisted that Florence show him respect and support. Once again a vague accommodation seems to have been reached, and Borgia did not attack. A few days later, probably as part of his arrangement with Florence that Machiavelli had helped to negotiate, Borgia secured the services of the city’s most famous artist and engineer, Leonardo da Vinci.3





LEONARDO AND BORGIA


Leonardo may have gone to work with Borgia at the behest of Machiavelli and Florence’s leaders as a gesture of goodwill, similar to the way he had been dispatched twenty years earlier to Milan as a diplomatic gesture to Ludovico Sforza. Or he may have been sent as a way for Florence to have an agent embedded with Borgia’s forces. Maybe it was both. But either way, Leonardo was no mere pawn or agent. He would not have gone to work for Borgia unless he wanted to.

On the first page of a pocket-size notebook he took on his journey in service of Borgia, Leonardo listed the equipment he packed: a pair of compasses, a sword belt, a light hat, a book of white paper for drawing, a leather vest, and a “swimming belt.” The last item was something he had earlier described among his military inventions. “Have a coat made of leather, which must be double across the breast, that is having a hem on each side of about a finger breadth,” he wrote. “When you want to leap into the sea, blow out the skirt of your coat through the double hems.”4

Even though Borgia was in Urbino, Leonardo first headed southwest from Florence to Piombino, a coastal town that was occupied by Borgia’s army. Apparently he had received orders from Borgia to make an inspection tour of the forts in Borgia’s control. In addition to studying the fortifications, he looked at ways to drain the marshes and—easily gliding back and forth between practical engineering and pure scientific curiosity—made a study of the movement of the waves and tides.

From there, he headed eastward across the Apennine Mountains to the other side of the Italian peninsula, gathering topographical data for maps and observing landscapes and bridges that would later be reflected in the Mona Lisa. Finally, in midsummer 1502, he arrived in Urbino to join Borgia, almost three years after first meeting him in Milan.

Leonardo sketched the staircase of Urbino’s palace and the dovecote, and he made a series of three red-chalk drawings that were likely of Borgia (fig. 85). The left-handed hatch lines of the drawing accentuate the shadows under Borgia’s eyes; he looks pensive and subdued, his ringlets of curly beard covering a face that has become thickened with age and perhaps pockmarked by his syphilis. He no longer looks like “the handsomest man in Italy,” as he was once called.5

Fig. 85. Leonardo’s sketches probably of Cesare Borgia.



Perhaps Borgia looked pensive because he was worried, rightly, that the king of France, Louis XII, was hedging his support for Borgia and promising protection to the Florentines. Swirling around the French court and the Vatican were intriguers who had been betrayed or divorced by various Borgias and were now seeking revenge. A week or so after his arrival in Urbino, Leonardo jotted in his notebook, “Where is Valentino?,”6 using a nickname for Borgia, who had been made the Duke of Valentinois by the French king. Borgia, it turned out, had disguised himself as a Knight Hospitaller and snuck away with three trusted guards to ride north at a furious pace to reinstate himself in the good graces of Louis, which he did.

Borgia had not forgotten Leonardo. When he reached Pavia, where Louis was then holding court, he issued a floridly written “passport” for Leonardo, giving him special privileges and rights of passage, dated August 18, 1502:

To all our lieutenants, castellans, captains, condottieri, soldiers, and subjects, who may be shown this document: You are hereby ordered and commanded on behalf of our most eminent and well-beloved familial friend [dilectissimo familiare], the architect and engineer general Leonardo Vinci, bearer of these documents, who has received our commission to inspect all the strongpoints and fortresses in our dominion, so that he may, according to their needs, provide for their maintenance. He shall be given free passage and be relieved of all public tax, both for himself and for his party, and shall be welcomed amicably, and may make measurements and examine whatever he pleases. For this purpose, provide him with as many men as he requisitions, and grant him all the help, succor and favor he may demand, for it is our will that every engineer in our dominions shall be bound to confer with him and follow his advice. And let no man dare to do the contrary, if he does not wish to incur our extreme displeasure.7

Borgia’s passport described Leonardo as he had fancied himself ever since his letter to the Duke of Milan twenty years earlier: as a military engineer and innovator rather than a painter. He had been warmly embraced, in fulsome and familial terms, by the most vibrant warrior of the age. For the moment, the man who had been described as no longer able to bear the sight of a brush got to play the role of a man of action.

Borgia left Pavia to rejoin his army in September, and Leonardo traveled with him eastward as he captured Fossombrone, using a combination of trickery, betrayal, and surprise. That taught Leonardo a lesson about designs for the interiors of castles and fortresses: “Be sure that the escape tunnel does not lead to the inner fortress, lest the fortress be captured by treachery or betrayal of the lord.”8 He also suggested that fortress walls be curved because that would reduce the impact of cannonballs. “Percussion is less strong the more oblique it is,” he wrote.9 He then accompanied Borgia’s army as it marched toward the Adriatic coast.

In the town of Rimini, he was enthralled by “the harmony of the different falls of water.”10 A few days later, in the port of Cesenatico, he sketched the harbor and drew up plans for defending the dykes “so that they are not vulnerable to artillery fire.” He also directed that the harbor be dredged so that it would stay linked to the sea. Always enthralled by ambitious water projects, he looked at ways the harbor canal could be extended ten miles inland to Cesena.11

While in Cesena, which Borgia had made the capital of his Romagna region conquests, Leonardo made a drawing of the fortress. But by then his mind was wandering from military matters. He sketched a house window with a quarter-circle pane on top, which reflected his interest in curved and rectilinear geometric shapes, and a hook with two bunches of grapes. “This is how they carry grapes in Cesena,” he explained.12 He also combined the compositional eye of a painter with that of an engineer to note how the workmen digging a ditch array themselves in a pyramid. He was not impressed with the engineering intelligence of the locals, at one point drawing a cart and saying of the Cesena region, “In Romagna, the chief realm of all stupidity [capo d’ogni grossezza d’ingegno], vehicles with four wheels are used, in which the two in front are small and the two high ones behind, an arrangement that is very unfavorable to motion, because on the front wheels more weight is laid than on those behind.”13 Ideas for building better wheelbarrows was a topic he had covered in one of his draft treatises on mechanics.

Fig. 86. Self-supporting bridge.



The mathematician Luca Pacioli later recounted a tale of Leonardo in action. “One day Cesare Borgia . . . found himself and his army at a river that was twenty-four paces wide, and could find no bridge, nor any material to make one except for a stack of wood all cut to a length of 16 paces,” Pacioli wrote, probably based on hearing the story from Leonardo. “From this wood, using neither iron nor rope nor any other construction, his noble engineer made a bridge sufficiently strong for the army to pass over.”14 A sketch for such a self-supporting bridge in Leonardo’s notebook (fig. 86, with a fainter version in fig. 53) has seven short poles and ten longer, each notched so they can be fit together at the scene.15

As the fall of 1502 approached, Borgia moved his court to the highly fortified town of Imola, thirty miles inland from Cesena on the road to Bologna. Leonardo made drawings of the fortress compound, noting that its moat was forty feet deep and its walls fifteen feet thick. In front of the only entrance through the walls surrounding the town was a moat split by a man-made island; anyone trying to invade had to cross two bridges and be exposed to a defensive barrage. Borgia’s plan was to turn the town into his permanent military headquarters by having Leonardo make it even more impregnable.16

Machiavelli arrived on October 7, sent by Florence to be an emissary and informant. In his daily dispatches back to Florence, which he knew were being read by Borgia’s intelligence agents, Machiavelli apparently refers to Leonardo only as “another who is also acquainted with Cesare’s secrets” and as a “friend” whose knowledge is “worthy of attention.”17 Imagine the scene. For three months during the winter of 1502–3, as if in a historical fantasy movie, three of the most fascinating figures of the Renaissance—a brutal and power-crazed son of a pope, a sly and amoral writer-diplomat, and a dazzling painter yearning to be an engineer—were holed up in a tiny fortified walled town that was approximately five blocks wide and eight blocks long.

While he was in Imola with Machiavelli and Borgia, Leonardo made what may be his greatest contribution to the art of war. It is a map of Imola, but not any ordinary map (fig. 87).18 It is a work of beauty, innovative style, and military utility. It combines, in his inimitable manner, art and science.

Fig. 87. Leonardo’s map of Imola.



Drawn in ink with colored washes and black chalk, the Imola map was an innovative step in cartography. The moat around the fortified town is tinted a subtle blue, the walls are silvery, and the roofs of the houses brick red. The aerial view is from directly overhead, unlike most maps of the time. On the edges he has specified the distances to nearby towns, useful information for military campaigns, but written in his elegant mirror script, indicating that the version that survives is a copy he made for himself rather than Borgia.

Leonardo used a magnetic compass, and the eight major directional lines (north, northwest, west, southwest, etc.) are shown with fine strokes. On a preliminary sketch, he marked the position and size of each house. The map is folded many times, indicating he tucked it in his pocket or pouch as he and his assistants paced off the distances.

Around this time, he perfected the odometer he had been developing to measure long distances (fig. 88).19 On a cart he mounted a vertical cog wheel, which looks like the front wheel of a wheelbarrow, that intersects with a horizontal cog wheel. Every time the vertical wheel completed a revolution, it would move the horizontal wheel a notch, and that would cast a stone into a container. On his drawing of the device, Leonardo noted that it “makes the ear hear the sound of a little stone falling into a basin.”20

The Imola map and others Leonardo made at the time would have been of great use to Borgia, whose victories came from conducting lightning strikes and, in the words of Machiavelli, being able “to install himself in someone else’s house before anyone else noticed it.” Acting as an artist-engineer, Leonardo had devised a new military weapon: accurate, detailed, and easily read maps. Over the years, visually clear maps would become a key component of warfare. For example, the U.S. National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (originally known as the Defense Mapping Agency) had 14,500 employees and an annual budget exceeding $5 billion in 2017. Projected on the walls of its headquarters are maps combining accuracy with beauty, some of which bear a striking resemblance to Leonardo’s map of Imola.

Fig. 88. An odometer.



In a larger sense, Leonardo’s maps are another example of one of his greatest, though underappreciated, innovations: devising new methods for the visual display of information. In his illustrations for Pacioli’s book on geometry, Leonardo was able to show models of a variety of polyhedrons that were perfectly shaded to look three-dimensional. In his notebook entries on engineering and mechanics, he drew pieces of machinery with subtlety and precision, adding cutaway shots of various components. He was among the first to deconstruct complex mechanisms and make separate drawings of each element. Likewise, in his anatomy drawings, he drew muscles, nerves, bones, organs, and blood vessels from different angles, and he pioneered the method of depicting them in multiple layers, like the transparencies of body layers found in encyclopedias centuries later.





LEAVING BORGIA


In December 1502, Cesare Borgia committed a typical act of brutality. He had empowered a deputy, Ramiro de Lorca, to tyrannize Cesena and the surrounding territories with unremitting cruelty and gruesome slaughter to intimidate the populace. But once Ramiro had inspired enough fear, Borgia realized that it would be useful to sacrifice him. The day after Christmas, he had Ramiro brought to the central square in Cesena and sliced in two. The pieces of his body remained there on display. “Cesare Borgia decided that there was no more need for this excessive power,” Machiavelli later explained in The Prince. “To purge the minds of the people and to win them over, Cesare determined to show the people that Ramiro’s cruelties were inflicted by him and not Cesare. One morning, Ramiro’s body was found cut in two pieces on the piazza at Cesena, with a block of wood and a bloody knife beside it. The brutality of this spectacle kept the people of the Romagna appeased and stupefied.” The coldness of Borgia’s brutality impressed Machiavelli, who called it “an example that deserves close study and imitation by others.”21

Borgia then marched on the coastal town of Senigallia, where local leaders had rebelled against his occupation. He offered them a meeting to negotiate a reconciliation, and he promised that they could keep their leadership roles if they pledged to be loyal. They agreed. But when Borgia arrived, he had the men seized and strangled to death, then ordered that the town be pillaged. By this point even the cold-blooded and calculating Machiavelli was getting a bit squeamish. “The sack of the town continues although it is now the twenty-third hour,” he scribbled in a dispatch. “I am much troubled.”

One of the strangled men was a friend of Leonardo, Vitellozzo Vitelli, who had lent him a book by Archimedes. Leonardo traveled with Borgia’s army for the conquest of Siena a few weeks later, but his notebooks suggest that he had mentally tuned out Borgia’s horrors by focusing on other matters. He made a sketch of the church bell at Siena, twenty feet in diameter, and described “the manner of its movement and the position of the attachment of its clapper.”22

A few days later, shortly after Machiavelli had been recalled to Florence, Leonardo left Borgia’s service. By March 1503 he was settled back in Florence and withdrawing money from his bank account at the hospital of Santa Maria Nuova.

“Save me from strife and battle, a most beastly madness,” Leonardo once wrote. Yet for eight months he had put himself at Borgia’s service and traveled with his armies. Why would a person whose notebook aphorisms decry killing and whose personal morality led him to be a vegetarian go to work for the most brutal murderer of the era? Partly this choice reflects Leonardo’s pragmatism. In a land where the Medici, Sforzas, and Borgias jostled for power, Leonardo was able to time his patronage affiliations well and know when to move on. But there is more. Even as he remained aloof from most current events, he seemed to be attracted to power.

It would take a Freudian analyst to explain Leonardo’s affinity for attaching himself to strong men, and once again Freud himself tried to do so. He believed that Leonardo gravitated to them as substitutes for the manly but often absent father of his childhood. A simpler explanation is that Leonardo, who had just turned fifty, had dreamed for more than two decades of being a military engineer. As Isabella d’Este’s agent reported, he was tired of painting. Borgia had just turned twenty-six. He combined bravado and elegance. “This lord is truly splendid and magnificent, and in war there is no enterprise so great that it does not seem small to him,” Machiavelli wrote after meeting him.23 Indifferent to the shifting political agendas of Italy yet attracted to military engineering and strongmen, Leonardo had a chance to live out his military fantasies, which he did until he realized they could become nightmares.





