CHAPTER 19




* * *





Personal Turmoil



CATERINA’S DEATH


On the rare occasions when he recorded a family event in his notebooks, Leonardo sometimes displayed a notarial tic of repeating the date. Thus he recorded the arrival of his mother, Caterina, now widowed and in her sixties, to live with him in Milan:

On the 16th day of July.

Caterina came on the 16th day of July 1493.1

During her years with her husband, Accattabriga, Caterina had four daughters and a son. But sometime around 1490 her husband died and their son was killed by a shot from a crossbow. In his notebook shortly after that, Leonardo jotted, “Can you tell me what la Caterina wishes to do?” Apparently, she wanted to come live with him.

On a page adjoining the one in his notebook where he records Caterina’s arrival, Leonardo writes a rudimentary family tree that she likely helped him make, listing the names of his father and grandparents. In June 1494 she is included in an accounting of his expenses: he gives 3 soldi to Salai and 20 soldi to her.2

She apparently died later that month. A record in the state archives of Milan reports, “On Thursday 26 June at the Parish of the Saints Nabore and Felix at Porta Vercellina, Caterina from Florence, 60 years old, died of malaria.” The evidence from the earlier archival records is that she was actually about fifty-eight, which is close enough to be in accord given the vagaries of records at the time.3

Leonardo sublimated whatever emotions he felt; he records nothing about her death, only an accounting of the cost of her funeral. On the listing of soldis he spent, he even crossed out the word “death” and wrote “burial.”4


Expenses for Caterina’s death. burial:

For 3 pounds of candle wax

s. 27



For the bier

s. 8



A pall for the bier

s. 12



For bearing and placing a cross

s. 4



For the bearers

s. 8



For 4 priests and 4 clerks

s. 20



Bell, book, sponge,

s. 2



For the gravediggers

s. 16



For the dean

s. 8



For the license

s. 1





s. 106



[Earlier expenses]





Doctor

s. 5



Sugar and candles

s. 12





s. 123



The detachment seems odd, and some have argued that the expenses seem low for a mother’s funeral. He would spend four times as much in 1497 on the silver cloth, velvet trim, and tailoring for a cloak for Salai.5 But a careful look shows that it was, in fact, a funeral suitable for his mother rather than a household servant. It was brightly lit, featured four priests, and was carefully planned and recorded for posterity.6





CAREER STRUGGLES


When he began painting The Last Supper around 1495, Leonardo was at a high point in his career. With his official appointment as artist and engineer of the Sforza court, he was comfortably ensconced at Milan’s old palace, the Corte Vecchia, with his retinue of assistants and students. He was renowned as a painter, admired as the sculptor of the mammoth clay model for the horse monument, beloved as a pageant impresario, and respected as a student of optics, flight, hydraulics, and anatomy.

But his life became unsettled in the late 1490s, after Caterina’s death and the completion of The Last Supper. The bronze for his horse monument had been redirected in 1494 to make cannon to defend against a possible French invasion, and it soon became clear that Ludovico was not going to replace it. Instead of major new commissions or portraits of ducal mistresses, he found himself doing interior design work and engaging in disputes over pay and performance. All the while, Duke Ludovico became increasingly preoccupied, and rightly so, by the French threats to his tenuous hold on power.

One of Leonardo’s projects was doing the decorative painting for a set of small rooms in the Sforza Castle, known as the camerini, that the duke planned to use as his private retreat. One of the vaulted wood-paneled rooms, the Sala delle Asse, was designed by Leonardo as an enchanted painted forest with sixteen trees, figuratively serving as an architectural fantasia of columns. Their branches intertwined in complex patterns worthy of his mathematical mind, and woven through this caprice was a golden rope that twisted into beautifully complex knots, a lifelong love of his. “In the trees we find a beautiful invention by Leonardo, where all the branches transform themselves into bizarre knots,” wrote Lomazzo.7

The execution did not go as well as the conception, as was often the case with Leonardo. There was a dispute, and one of the duke’s secretaries wrote in June 1496, “The painter who is decorating the camerini caused something of a scandal today, and for this reason he has left.”8 The secretary asked if someone could be sent from Venice to finish the work.

That never happened, and Leonardo resumed the commission in early 1498, just as he was finishing work on The Last Supper. But there were other disputes that are revealed in letters drafted in his notebooks. One angry missive from 1497 has been ripped in half, so we have only fragments of sentences that express his frustration. “You remember the commission to paint the camerini” reads one phrase. “Of the horse I will say nothing because I know the times are bad,” is another. Then comes a tumult of complaints, including “two years of my salary still not received.”9 In another letter drafted for the duke, Leonardo again complained about money and seems to imply that he had to put aside work on The Last Supper to make money by decorating the Sala delle Asse. “Perhaps your Excellency did not give further orders to [pay me], believing that I had money enough,” he wrote. “It vexes me greatly that having to earn my living has forced me to interrupt the work and to attend to small matters, instead of following up the work which your Lordship entrusted to me.”10

As with The Last Supper, Leonardo was too slow-paced in painting the Sala delle Asse to put up with using the traditional fresco method that required each section to be executed rapidly on wet plaster before it dried. Instead, he again used a tempera-oil mixture on a dry wall (the wood panels of the room had been removed, unfortunately). The dry plaster did not absorb the pigments, resulting in the same deterioration as suffered by The Last Supper. It was restored badly around 1901, salvaged in the 1950s, and in 2017 was in the midst of a more careful, laser-guided restoration.

After his temperamental disputes involving the Sala delle Asse, Leonardo hit a low point. He found himself drafting job applications, including a letter written in the third person to the council of the nearby town of Piacenza, which was commissioning brass doors for the cathedral there. He wrote the letter extolling himself as if he planned to have a supporter send it on his behalf. “Open your eyes and look carefully that your money is not spent as to purchase your own shame,” the letter reads. “There is not a man who is capable—and you may believe me—except Leonardo the Florentine, who is making the bronze horse of the Duke Francesco.”11

Larger forces intervened to rescue Leonardo from his employment concerns. In the summer of 1499, an invasion force sent by the new French king, Louis XII, was bearing down on Milan. Leonardo added up the money in his cash box, 1,280 lire, distributed some to Salai (20 lire) and others, and then proceeded to hide the rest in paper packets around his studio to keep it safe from invaders and looters. At the beginning of September, Duke Ludovico fled the city, which the French king entered a month later. As Leonardo feared, mobs destroyed the homes of many of his friends and looted their treasures. His studio was spared, but the French troops destroyed the clay model of his unbuilt horse monument by shooting arrows at it.

The French were, it turned out, protective of Leonardo. The day after his arrival, the king went to see The Last Supper, and he even asked whether it might be possible to cart it back to France. Fortunately, his engineers told him it was impossible. Instead of fleeing, Leonardo spent the next few months working with the French. He made a note to contact one of the painters who had arrived in Milan with King Louis and to get from him “the method of using dry colors and the white salt method and how to make coated paper.” On the same page, he laid out a leisurely set of preparations for the long trip from Milan back to Florence and Vinci, which he would not begin until December. “Have two covered boxes made to be carried on mules. One of which leave at Vinci. Buy some tablecloths, napkins, cloaks, caps, and shoes, four pair of hose, a chamois jerkin and skins to make new ones. Sell what you cannot take with you.” In other words, he was not scurrying to escape from the French.

In fact, he had forged a secret deal with the new French governor of Milan, the Count of Ligny, to meet him in Naples and act as a military engineer inspecting fortifications. In one of the most curious entries in his notebooks, on the same page as his list preparing for his trip, Leonardo writes not only in his mirror script but using a simplistic code in which he spells names and cities backward: “Go and find ingil [Ligny] and tell him you will wait for him at amor [Roma] and that you will go with him to ilopan [Napoli].”12

That plot never came to fruition. What made Leonardo finally leave Milan was the news that his former patron Ludovico was plotting a comeback. In late December, Leonardo made arrangements to transfer 600 florins from his Milanese bank to an account in Florence, then left with his retinue of assistants and his friend the mathematician Luca Pacioli. Eighteen years after he had arrived in Milan with a lute and a letter for Ludovico proclaiming his talents as an engineer and artist, Leonardo da Vinci was returning home to Florence.





