CHAPTER 4




* * *





Milan



CULTURAL DIPLOMAT


In 1482, the year he turned thirty, Leonardo da Vinci left Florence for Milan, where he would end up spending the next seventeen years. Traveling with him was his companion Atalante Migliorotti, now fifteen, the aspiring musician who learned from Leonardo how to play the lyre and became one of the many young men who floated in and out of his retinue over the years.1 Leonardo estimated in his notebook that the trip was 180 miles long, which was quite accurate; he had devised a type of odometer that measured distance by counting the turns of a vehicle wheel, and he may have experimented with one on the way. It would have taken him and his companions about a week.

With him he carried a lira da braccio (lyre for the arm), roughly akin to a fiddle or violin. “He was sent by Lorenzo the Magnificent, along with Atalante Migliorotti, to the Duke of Milan to present him a lyre, since he was unique in playing this instrument,” the Anonimo Gaddiano reports. It was made partly of silver, and Leonardo had crafted it in the shape of a horse’s skull.

The lyre and Leonardo’s services were a diplomatic gift. Lorenzo de’ Medici, eager to navigate the swirling rivalries and alliances among the Italian city-states, saw Florence’s artistic culture as a source of influence. Botticelli and some of his other favorite artists went to Rome to please the pope, Verrocchio and others to Venice.

Leonardo and Atalante were probably part of a February 1482 diplomatic delegation headed by Bernardo Rucellai, a wealthy banker, arts patron, and philosophy enthusiast who was married to Lorenzo’s older sister and had just been made Florence’s ambassador to Milan.2 In his writings, Rucellai introduced the term balance of power to describe the continuous conflicts and shifting alliances involving Florence, Milan, other Italian city-states, plus a pride of popes, French kings, and Holy Roman emperors. The competition among the various rulers was not only military but cultural, and Leonardo sought to be useful on both fronts.

Packing almost all of his belongings, Leonardo embarked for Milan with the thought that he might move there indefinitely. The list he made of his possessions sometime after his arrival in Milan seems to encompass most of his work that could be transported. In addition to the drawing of Atalante with his face raised, there were sketches of “many flowers copied from nature . . . some Saint Jeromes . . . designs of furnaces . . . a head of Christ done in pen . . . eight Saint Sebastians . . . many compositions of angels . . . a head in profile with beautiful hair . . . gadgets for ships . . . gadgets for water . . . many necks of old women and heads of old men . . . many complete nudes . . . a Madonna finished . . . another almost finished that is in profile . . . the head of an old man with an enormous chin . . . a narrative of the Passion made in relief” and much more.3 The inclusion on the list of designs for furnaces and gadgets for ships and for water shows that he was already engaged with engineering as well as art.

Milan, with 125,000 citizens, was three times the size of Florence. More important for Leonardo, it had a ruling court. The Medici in Florence were generous supporters of the arts, but they were bankers who operated behind the scenes. Milan was different. For two hundred years, it had been not a merchant republic but a city-state ruled by militaristic strongmen who crowned themselves hereditary dukes, first the heads of the Visconti family and then the Sforza family. Because their ambitions were grand but their claims to their titles tenuous, their castles were filled with courtiers, artists, performers, musicians, huntmasters, statecrafters, animal trainers, engineers, and any other helpers or ornaments who could burnish their prestige and legitimacy. In other words, Milan’s castle provided a perfect environment for Leonardo, who had a fondness for strong leaders, loved the diversity of talent they attracted, and aspired to be on a comfortable retainer.

When Leonardo arrived, Milan was ruled by Ludovico Sforza, who was also thirty. A dark-skinned and burly man nicknamed “Il Moro” (the Moor), he was not actually the Duke of Milan yet, though he exercised the authority and would soon grab the title. His father, Francesco Sforza, one of seven illegitimate sons of a military mercenary, had seized power and made himself duke in 1450, after the Visconti dynasty dissolved. Upon his death, Ludovico’s older brother became duke, but he was soon assassinated, leaving the title to his seven-year-old son. Ludovico eased aside the boy’s mother as regent, thus effectively taking control of Milan in 1479. He set about beguiling and bullying his hapless nephew, usurping his powers, executing his supporters, and probably poisoning him. He officially invested himself the Duke of Milan in 1494.

Ruthless in a pragmatic way, Ludovico cloaked his calculated cruelty with pretenses of courtesy, culture, and civility. Tutored by the distinguished Renaissance humanist Francesco Filelfo in painting and writing, he sought to legitimize his power and prestige, along with that of Milan, by attracting great scholars and artists to the Sforza court. He had long dreamed of building a massive equestrian monument to his father, partly as a way to enshrine the family’s power.

Unlike Florence, Milan was not well-stocked with master artists. That made it more fertile territory for Leonardo. Because he was an aspiring polymath, he also enjoyed that Milan was filled with scholars and intellectuals in a wide variety of fields, partly due to the esteemed university in nearby Pavia, which was officially founded in 1361 but had roots stretching back to 825. It boasted some of Europe’s best lawyers, philosophers, medical researchers, and mathematicians.

Ludovico spent profligately on his personal desires: 140,000 ducats to refurbish the rooms of his palace and 16,000 ducats for his hunting hawks, hounds, and horses.I He was stingier with the intellectual and entertainment retainers in his court: his astrologer had an annual stipend of 290 ducats, high-level government officials got 150 ducats, and the artist-architect Donato Bramante, who would become Leonardo’s friend, complained of getting only 62 ducats.4





THE JOB APPLICATION


It was probably soon after his arrival in Milan that Leonardo drafted the letter to Ludovico described at the beginning of this book. Some historians have supposed that he wrote the letter from Florence, but this seems unlikely. He mentioned the park adjoining Ludovico’s castle and the proposed equestrian monument to his father, indications that he had already spent time in Milan before composing the letter.5

Leonardo did not, of course, write it in his usual mirror script. The copy that survives in his notebooks is a draft, marked up with a few changes, that was composed in the conventional left-to-right manner by a scribe or one of his assistants with good penmanship.6 It reads:

Most illustrious Lord,

Having now sufficiently studied the inventions of all those who proclaim themselves skilled contrivers of instruments of war, and having found that these instruments are no different than those in common use, I shall be bold enough to offer, with all due respect to the others, my own secrets to your Excellency and to demonstrate them at your Convenience.

1) I have designed extremely light and strong bridges, adapted to be easily carried, and with them you may pursue and at any time flee from the enemy; and others, indestructible by fire and battle, easy to lift and place. Also methods of burning and destroying those of the enemy.

2) I know how, during a siege, to take the water out of the trenches, and make an infinite variety of bridges, covered ways, ladders, and other machines suitable to such expeditions.

3) If a place under siege cannot be reduced by bombardment, because of the height of its banks or the strength of its position, I have methods for destroying any fortress even if it is founded upon solid rock.

4) I have kinds of cannons, convenient and easy to carry, that can fling small stones almost resembling a hailstorm; and the smoke of these will cause great terror to the enemy, to his great detriment and confusion.

9) [Leonardo moved up this item in the draft.] And when the fight is at sea, I have many kinds of efficient machines for offense and defense, and vessels that will resist the attack of the largest guns, and powder and fumes.

5) I have ways of making, without noise, underground tunnels and secret winding passages to arrive at a desired point, even if it is necessary to pass underneath trenches or a river.

6) I will make unassailable armored chariots that can penetrate the ranks of the enemy with their artillery, and there is no body of soldiers so great that it could withstand them. And behind these, infantry could follow quite unhurt.

7) In case of need I will make cannons and artillery of beautiful and useful design that are different from those in common use.

8) Where bombardment will not work, I can devise catapults, mangonels, caltrops and other effective machines not in common use.

10) In times of peace I can give perfect satisfaction and be the equal of any other in architecture and the composition of buildings public and private; and in guiding water from one place to another.

Also, I can execute sculpture in marble, bronze and clay. Likewise in painting, I can do everything possible, as well as any other man, whosoever he may be.

Moreover, work could be undertaken on the bronze horse, which will be to the immortal glory and eternal honor of His Lordship, your father, and of the illustrious house of Sforza. And if any of the above-mentioned things seem impossible or impracticable to anyone, I am most readily disposed to demonstrate them in your park or in whatsoever place shall please Your Excellency.

Leonardo mentioned none of his paintings. Nor did he refer to the talent that ostensibly caused him to be sent to Milan: an ability to design and play musical instruments. What he mainly pitched was a pretense of military engineering expertise. Partly this was to appeal to Ludovico, whose Sforza dynasty had taken power by force and was faced with the constant threat of a local revolt or French invasion. In addition, Leonardo cast himself as an engineer because he was going through one of his regular bouts of being bored or blocked by the prospect of picking up a brush. As his mood swung between melancholy and exultation, he fantasized and boasted about being an accomplished weapons designer.

These boasts were aspirational. He had never been to a battle nor actually built any of the weapons he described. All he had produced thus far were some elegant sketches of concepts for weapons, many of them more fanciful than practical.

His letter to Ludovico is thus best regarded not as a reliable catalogue of his actual engineering accomplishments but instead as a glimpse into his hopes and ambitions. Nevertheless, his boasts were not completely hollow. Had they been, he would have been easily exposed in a city where weapon design was a deadly serious endeavor. After settling into Milan, he would in fact begin to pursue military engineering earnestly and come up with some innovative concepts for machines, even as he continued to dance around the line between ingenuity and fantasy.7





MILITARY ENGINEER


While still living in Florence, Leonardo had sketched a few proposals for clever military devices. One was a mechanism for knocking down the ladders of enemy invaders trying to scale a castle wall (fig. 21).8 The defenders inside would pull large levers connected to rods that poked through holes in the wall. His drawing includes enlarged details showing how the rods would be attached to the levers plus lively sketches of four soldiers pulling ropes and keeping an eye on the enemy. A related idea was for a propeller-like device that would slash away at those who made it to the top of the castle wall. Gears and shafts turned blades, like those of a helicopter, that would swing just above the wall, chopping down unfortunate soldiers trying to climb over. For when it was time to be on the offense, he designed a rolling armored siege machine that placed a covered bridge over the fortified walls of a castle.9

Fig. 21. Machine for pushing away ladders.



The spread of printing presses helped Leonardo pursue additional military ideas after he arrived in Milan. He borrowed some of his concepts from a book by the thirteenth-century scientist Roger Bacon that had a list of ingenious weapons, including “carts and wagons that could move without animal power; devices used to walk on water and to move underneath the water, and contrivances capable of putting man in flight, having a person placed in the center of a mechanical device with artificial wings.”10 Leonardo embellished on all of these ideas. He also studied Roberto Valturio’s On the Military Arts, a treatise filled with woodcuts of ingenious weapons. It was published in Latin in 1472 and in Italian in 1483, the year after Leonardo arrived in Milan. He bought both versions, annotated them, and struggled to improve his rudimentary Latin by making lists of the terms in the original book alongside their Italian translations.

Valturio’s book became a springboard for Leonardo’s creativity. For example, Valturio included a drawing of a cart with rotating scythes that was rather tame; each wheel of the clunky cart had only one small, unintimidating blade attached.11 With his fevered imagination, Leonardo kicked the concept up multiple notches for a fearsome scythed chariot that became one of his most famous—and disconcerting—pieces of military engineering.12

Leonardo’s drawings of this scythed chariot, which he made soon after he moved to Milan, feature truly frightening whirling blades jutting out from the wheels. It also has a four-bladed spinning shaft that can project in the front or be dragged behind the chariot. He meticulously drew the connection of the gears and cogs to the shafts and wheels, creating artwork so beautiful as to be jarring. The galloping horses and the riders with their billowing capes are dazzling studies of motion, while his hatching strokes create shade and modeling worthy of a museum piece.

One sheet of scythed chariot drawings is especially vivid (fig. 22).13 On the near side of the moving chariot two bodies lie on the ground, their legs sliced off and the pieces scattered. On the far side he depicts two soldiers just at the moment they are being sliced in half. Here is our gentle and beloved Leonardo, who became a vegetarian because of his fondness for all creatures, wallowing in horrifying depictions of death. It is, perhaps, yet another glimpse of his inner turmoil. Within his dark cave was a demon imagination.

Fig. 22. Scythed chariot.



Fig. 23. Giant crossbow.



Another of his imagined but unbuilt weapons, which likewise blurs the border between practicality and fantasy, is a giant crossbow (fig. 23) that he drew in Milan around 1485.14 The proposed machine is huge: its armature is eighty feet across, and so is the four-wheeled carriage that would roll it onto the battlefield. To put it in perspective, he shows the weapon dwarfing a soldier who is preparing to unleash the trigger.

Leonardo was a pioneer in propounding laws of proportion: how one quantity, such as force, rises in proportion to another, such as the length of a lever. A super-sized crossbow should, he correctly surmised, be able to hurl projectiles that were bigger or went farther. He tried to figure out the correlation between the distance the bowstring was pulled and the force it exerted on the projectile. At first he thought that a bowstring pulled back twice as far would exert twice the force. But he realized that rate was thrown off by the bending of the bow as the string was pulled. After various calculations, he finally concluded that the force is proportional to the angle of the string at the point where it is pulled back. Pull the string back hard, and it will make (say) a 90-degree angle; pull back even harder, and perhaps you can get the angle down to 45 degrees. A 45-degree angle, he theorized, would deliver twice the force of 90 degrees. That doesn’t turn out to be exactly right; Leonardo did not know trigonometry and thus couldn’t refine the theory. But in concept he was close. He was learning to use geometric shapes as analogues for nature’s forces.

In Leonardo’s design, the bow was to be made with interlocking layers of wood, an early example of lamination. That would make it flexible, springy, and less likely to crack. Its string was pulled back by ropes attached to a large gear-and-screw mechanism, which he detailed in a side drawing. Cocked in such a fashion, he wrote, the device should be able to fling “one hundred pounds of stones.” Gunpowder was in common use by then, which would seem to make a mechanical crossbow obsolete. However, if the crossbow had worked, it could have been cheaper, easier, and certainly quieter than cannons using gunpowder.

As with the scythed chariot, a question arises: How serious was Leonardo? Was he merely being clever on paper and trying to impress Ludovico? Was the giant crossbow another example of his ingenuity blurring into fantasy? I believe his proposal was serious. He made more than thirty preparatory drawings, and he detailed with precision the gears, worm screws, shafts, triggers, and other mechanisms. Nevertheless, the crossbow should be classified as a work of imagination rather than invention. It was never constructed by Ludovico Sforza. When it was finally built for a television special in 2002, the contemporary engineers were unable to get it to work. During his career, Leonardo would be known for paintings, monuments, and inventions that he conceived but never brought to fruition. The giant crossbow falls into that category.15

That was also true, it turned out, for most of the military devices he conceived and drew during the 1480s. “I will make unassailable armored chariots,” he promised in his letter to Ludovico. He did in fact design one, at least on paper. His drawing of an armored tank, which looks like a cross between a turtle and a flying saucer, shows metal plates slanted on an angle that would cause it to deflect enemy projectiles. Inside would be eight men, some of them turning cranks to cause the tank to inch ahead, the others firing cannons that project out in all directions. There is one design flaw: a careful look at the crank and gears shows that they would turn the front wheels and the back wheels in opposite directions. Did he draw it that way intentionally so that it could not be easily constructed without his modification? Perhaps. But the issue was moot; the machine was never built.

He had also promised Ludovico, “I will make cannons and artillery of beautiful and useful design that are different from those in common use.” One such attempt was a steam cannon, or architronito, an idea that Leonardo attributed to Archimedes and that was also in Valturio’s book. The concept was that the breach of a cannon would be heated in burning coals until it was super-hot, then a small amount of water would be injected just behind the cannon ball. If the ball was held in place for a second or so, enough steam pressure would build up to fire it a few hundred yards when released.16 Another proposal he drew was for a machine with many cannons, one with racks of eleven cannons each. While one set of cannons was cooling off and being reloaded, the other sets could be firing. It was the precursor to the machine gun.17

Only one of Leonardo’s military conceptions is known to have made it off the pages of his notebooks and onto the battlefield, and he arguably deserves priority as its inventor. The wheellock, or wheel lock, which he devised in the 1490s, was a way to create a spark for igniting the gunpowder in a musket or similar hand-carried weapon. When the trigger was pulled, a metal wheel was set spinning by a spring. As it scraped against a stone, it sparked enough heat to ignite the gunpowder. Leonardo used components of some of his previous devices, which included spring-powered wheels. One of the assistants who lived in Leonardo’s household at the time was a technician and locksmith named Giulio Tedesco, known as Jules the German, who returned to Germany around 1499 and spread Leonardo’s idea there. The wheellock came into use in Italy and Germany around that time and proved to be influential in facilitating both warfare and the personal use of guns.18

Leonardo’s wondrously imaginative giant crossbows and turtle-like tanks show his ability to let fantasy drive invention. But he had not lashed his imagination to practicality. None of his big machines would be deployed in battle by Ludovico Sforza, who did not face a serious confrontation until the French invaded Milan in 1499, at which time he fled the city. As it turned out, Leonardo would not be involved in military activity until 1502, when he went to work for a more difficult and tyrannical strongman, Cesare Borgia.19

The only military project Leonardo actually delivered to Ludovico was a survey of the castle’s defenses. He expressed approval of the thickness of the walls, but he warned that the small apertures were directly connected to secret passageways in the castle, which could permit attackers to swarm the castle if breached. While at it, he also noted the proper method for preparing the bath for Ludovico’s young new wife: “four parts of cold water to three parts of hot water.”20





THE IDEAL CITY


Near the end of his job application to Ludovico Sforza, Leonardo touted himself as someone who could “be the equal of any other in architecture and the composition of buildings.” But for his first few years in Milan, he had trouble getting any such commissions. So for the time being, he pursued his architectural interests the way he did his military interests: mainly on paper as imaginative visions never to be implemented.

The best example was his set of plans for a utopian city, which was a favorite subject for Italian Renaissance artists and architects. Milan had been ravaged in the early 1480s by three years of the bubonic plague, which killed close to one-third of its inhabitants. With his scientific instincts, Leonardo realized that the plague was spread by unsanitary conditions and that the health of the citizens was related to the health of their city.

He did not focus on marginal improvements in engineering and design. Instead, on multiple pages composed in 1487, he proposed a radical concept, one that combined his artistic sensibilities with his visions as an urban engineer: the creation of entirely new “ideal cities” planned for health and beauty. The population of Milan would be relocated to ten new towns, designed and built from scratch along the river, in order to “disperse its great congregation of people which are packed like goats one behind the other, filling every place with fetid smells and sowing seeds of pestilence and death.”21

He applied the classic analogy between the microcosm of the human body and the macrocosm of the earth: cities are organisms that breathe and have fluids that circulate and waste that needs to move. He had recently begun studying blood and fluid circulation in the body. Thinking by analogy, he considered what would be the best circulation systems for urban needs, ranging from commerce to waste removal.

The glory of Milan was that it had an ample water supply and a long tradition of channeling the flow of mountain streams and melting snows. Leonardo’s idea was to combine the streets and canals into a unified circulation system. The utopian city he envisioned would have two levels: an upper level designed for beauty and pedestrian life, and a level hidden below for canals, commerce, sanitation, and sewage.

“Let only that which is good looking be seen on the upper level of the city,” he decreed. The wide streets and arcaded walkways on this level would be reserved for pedestrians and be flanked by beautiful homes and gardens. Unlike the cramped streets of Milan, which Leonardo realized led to the spread of disease, the boulevards in the new town would be at least as wide as the height of the houses. To keep these boulevards clean, they would be sloped to the middle to allow rainwater to drain through central slits into a sewer circulation system below. These were not merely general suggestions; Leonardo got very specific. “Each road must be 20 braccia wide and have ½ braccio slope from the sides towards the middle,” he wrote, “and in the middle let there be at every braccio an opening, one braccio long and one finger wide, where the rain water may run off into hollows.”II

The lower level, beneath the visible surface, would have canals and roads for deliveries, storage areas, alleys for carts, and a sewerage system to carry away refuse and “fetid substances.” Homes would have main entries on the upper level and tradesmen’s entrances on the lower level, which would be lit by air shafts and connected to the upper level “at each arch by a winding stair.” He specified that these stairs should be spiral, both because he loved that form and because he was a fastidious man. Corners provided a place for men to urinate. “The corners of square ones are always fouled,” he wrote. “At the first vault there must be a door entering into public privies.” Once again he delved into the details: “The seat of the latrine should be able to swivel like the turnstile in a convent and return to its initial position by the use of a counterweight. The ceiling should have many holes in it so that one can breathe.”22

As with so many other of Leonardo’s visionary designs, he was ahead of what was practical for his time. Ludovico did not adopt his vision of the city, but in this case Leonardo’s proposals were sensible as well as brilliant. If even part of his plan had been implemented, it might have transformed the nature of cities, reduced the onslaught of plagues, and changed history.



* * *




I. About $19 million worth of gold in 2017.

II. A braccio is approximately 2.3 feet.





