CHAPTER 25




* * *





Michelangelo and the Lost Battles



THE ASSIGNMENT


The commission that Leonardo received in October 1503 to paint a sprawling battle scene for Florence’s Council Hall in the Palazzo della Signoria could have become one of the most important of his life. Had he completed the mural along the lines of the preparatory drawings he made, the result would have been a narrative masterpiece as captivating as The Last Supper, but one in which the motions of the bodies and the emotions of the minds would not have been constrained by the confined setting of a Passover Seder, as The Last Supper was. The finished work might have matched the emotional whirlwind that the Adoration of the Magi hinted at being, except wrought much larger.

But as with so many of his projects, Leonardo ended up not finishing the Battle of Anghiari, and what he painted is now lost. We can envision it mainly through copies. The best, which shows only the central part of what would have been a much larger mural, is by Peter Paul Rubens (fig. 91), which was made from other copies in 1603, after Leonardo’s unfinished work was covered up.

Fig. 91. Peter Paul Rubens’ copy of Leonardo’s Battle of Anghiari.



Heightening the significance of the commission was the fact that Leonardo would end up pitted against his personal and professional young rival, Michelangelo, who was chosen in early 1504 to paint the other large mural in the hall. Even though neither painting was finished—like Leonardo’s, Michelangelo’s work is known to us only through copies and preparatory drawings—the saga provides a fascinating look at how the contrasting styles of Leonardo, then fifty-one, and Michelangelo, twenty-eight, each transformed the history of art.1

Florence’s leaders wanted Leonardo’s mural to be a celebration of a 1440 victory over Milan, one of the few examples of Florence’s triumph on the battlefield. Their intent was to exalt the glory of their warriors. But Leonardo aimed to create something more profound. He had intense, conflicted feelings about war. After long fancying himself a military engineer, he had recently gained his first close-up experiences of war in the service of the brutal Cesare Borgia. At one point in his notebooks he called war “a most beastly madness,” and some of his parables espouse pacifist sentiments. On the other hand, he had always been captivated and even beguiled by the martial arts. As we can see from his preparatory drawings, he planned to convey the enthralling passion that made war so gripping as well as the brutality that made it so abhorrent. The result would have been neither a commemoration of conquest like the Bayeux Tapestry nor an antiwar statement like Picasso’s Guernica. In his own nature and in his art, Leonardo’s attitude toward war was complex.

The location for the proposed painting was immense. It was to adorn almost one-third of the length of a 174-foot wall that was in the imposing meeting chamber for Florence’s Signoria, or ruling council, on the second floor of what is now called the Palazzo Vecchio (fig. 92). The hall had been expanded in 1494 by Savonarola so that it would seat all five hundred members of the Grand Council. With Savonarola gone, the leader of the council was known as the gonfaloniere, or standard-bearer. That helped Leonardo determine what would be the central element of his Battle of Anghiari mural: the fight for the standard at the climax of the battle.

Leonardo was given workshop space for himself and his assistants in the “Popes’ Room” in the cloisters of the Church of Santa Maria Novella, which was large enough to accommodate his full-size preparatory drawing. Machiavelli’s secretary Agostino Vespucci provided Leonardo with a long narrative description of the original battle, including a blow-by-blow chronicle involving forty squadrons of cavalry and two thousand foot soldiers. Leonardo dutifully placed the account in his notebook (using a spare bit of the page to draw a new idea for hinged wings of a flying machine), and then proceeded to ignore it.2 He decided instead to focus on an intimate struggle of a few horsemen flanked by scenes of two other tight skirmishes.

Fig. 92. Florence’s Palazzo della Signoria, now the Palazzo Vecchio, in 1498 during the burning of Savonarola. The Duomo is on the left.





THE CONCEPTION


The idea of painting a battle scene that was both glorious and horrifying was not new for Leonardo. He had written a long description more than ten years earlier, when he was in Milan, of how it should be done. He paid particular attention to the colors of the dust and smoke. “First you must represent the smoke of artillery mingling in the air with the dust tossed up by the movement of horses and the combatants,” he instructed. “The finest part of the dust rises highest; hence that part will be least visible and will look almost the same color as the air. . . . At the top, where the smoke is more separate from the dust, the smoke will assume a bluish tinge.” He even specified how the dust clouds would be kicked up by the horses: “Make the little clouds of dust distant from each other in proportion to the strides made by the galloping horses; and the clouds which are furthest removed from the horses should be least visible; make them high and spreading and thin, and the nearer ones will be more conspicuous and smaller and denser.”

He went on to describe, with his conflicted mix of fascination and repulsion, how to portray the brutality of battle: “If you show a man who has fallen to the ground, show the place where he has been dragged as bloody mud. A horse will drag the body of its dead rider, leaving traces of the corpse’s blood in the dust and mud. Make the vanquished look pale and panic-stricken, their eyebrows raised high or knitted in grief, their faces stricken with painful lines.” His account, more than a thousand words long, got more lurid as he warmed to his task. The brutality of war didn’t repulse him as much as it seemed to mesmerize him, and the goriness he described would be reflected in the drawings he made for his battle mural:

You must make the dead covered with dust, which is changed into crimson mire where it has mingled with the blood issuing in a stream from the corpse. The dying will be grinding their teeth, their eyeballs rolling heavenward as they beat their bodies with their fìsts and twist their limbs. Some might be shown disarmed and beaten down by the enemy, turning upon the foe to take an inhuman and bitter revenge with teeth and nails. . . . Some maimed warrior may be seen fallen to the earth, covering himself with his shield, while the enemy, bending over him, tries to deal him a deadly blow.

Just the thought of war brought out Leonardo’s dark side and transformed the gentle artist. “There must not be a level spot that is not trampled and saturated with blood,” he concluded.3 His passion is visible in the frenzied sketches he drew in 1503 as he threw himself into his new commission.





THE DRAWINGS


Leonardo’s initial drawings for the Battle of Anghiari show various moments of the battle, including one of cavalcades of infantry swarming to the scene, another of the Florentine troops arriving, and one showing them racing away with the battle standard that the Milanese carried. But gradually he tightened his focus on a single skirmish. The scene he finally chose for his central section was of three Florentine horsemen grappling the standard away from Milan’s defeated but still-defiant general.4

In one preparatory drawing in the series (fig. 93), Leonardo used quick and sharp brown-ink strokes to show the fury of the four horses and riders struggling. On the lower half of the page he sketched nine versions of a nude soldier in frenzied twists as he swings a lance. Another drawing in the series shows soldiers being trampled, dragged, and lanced by the furious horsemen, just as he had described in his notebook. His depictions of the frantic clash of men and horses are messily tangled yet also gruesomely precise. One shows massive steeds rearing up and crashing down on naked soldiers squirming on the ground. The riders clinging atop the horses thrust lances into the bodies of the fallen. On another sheet he sketched a soldier beating a writhing enemy warrior who is also being lanced by a horseman. The brutality is frenzied, the savagery chaotic. Leonardo’s astonishing ability to use simple pen strokes to capture movement has reached its peak. If you stare long enough at the pages, the horses and bodies seem as vibrant as a video.

Fig. 93. Study for the Battle of Anghiari.



Fig. 94. A warrior for the Battle of Anghiari.



Fig. 95. Conveying the motion of horses.



He planned the expressions on the faces with great care. In one preparatory chalk drawing, he focused on the face of an old warrior, his bulging brows furrowed and nose wrinkled, as he stares down and shouts with rage (fig. 94). From the brows to the eyes to the mouth, Leonardo displayed his mastery of conveying emotions with every element of a face. His anatomy studies had taught him which of the facial muscles that move the lips also affect nostrils and brows. That allowed him to follow his own directions, written a decade earlier, on how to show an angry, anguished face: “The sides of the nose should have certain furrows, going in an arch from the nose and terminating at the edge of the eyes. Make the nostrils drawn up, causing these furrows, and the lips arched to disclose the upper teeth, with the teeth parted in order to shriek lamentations.”5 This sketch ended up being the model for the central warrior in his final full-size drawing for the painting.

Leonardo had long been fascinated by horses, which he obsessively drew and even dissected when he worked on the equestrian monument for Ludovico Sforza in Milan. In his preparatory drawings for the Anghiari mural, he reengaged in the subject. His possessions at the time included “a book of horses sketched for the cartoon,”6 and they display the same intensity of motion and emotion as the human faces he drew. Vasari was among those impressed by how Leonardo was able to make the horses as much a part of the physical and emotional battle as the humans: “Rage, fury, and revenge are perceived as much in the men as in the horses, two of which have their forelegs interlocked and are fighting no less fiercely with their teeth than those who are riding them.”

In one of these drawings (fig. 95), Leonardo used a frenzy of chalk strokes to combine two sequential instants, like a stop-action photographer or a precursor to Duchamp. The technique allowed him to convey the horse’s wild lurching and lunging as it engaged in the battle with an intensity equal to that of its rider. In his best drawings, Leonardo amazes us by capturing the world precisely as an observant eye would see it; in the case of the wildly charging horses, he goes even further by capturing motion in a way that our eye cannot see. “They are among the greatest evocations of movement in the entire history of art,” the British art critic Jonathan Jones wrote. “Movement, something that had obsessed Leonardo ever since he had tried to catch the blur of a cat’s squirming limbs in an early drawing, is here clarified as a theme with blood-red intensity.”7

On another page from his book of horses, he demonstrated how a horse could display emotion like a human (fig. 96). There are six horse heads, each showing a different degree of anger. Some bare their teeth and, like the old warrior, furrow their brow and flare their nostrils. In the midst of these boldly drawn horses, he lightly sketched, as if for comparison, the head of a man and of a lion with analogous expressions of fury, their teeth bared and furrowed brow thrust forward. Here we have a cross between a piece of art and a study in comparative anatomy. What began as a preparatory drawing—and indeed had elements that found their way into the battle scene he began to paint—also became, in inimitable Leonardo fashion, an investigation into muscles and nerves.

Fig. 96. Horses showing fury, with an angry lion and man in the center.



For a final reminder of how varied his passions and curiosities were, we can turn over the page of horse sketches to see what else he was thinking about at the time. The reverse of the sheet also has an energetic sketch of a horse’s head, but above it is a carefully rendered schematic of the solar system, showing the earth and sun and moon with projection lines explaining why we see the various phases of the moon. In a note, he analyzed the illusion of why the moon appears larger when it is on the horizon than when overhead. Look at an object through a concave lens and it will seem bigger, he wrote, and “by this means you will have produced an exact imitation of the atmosphere.” On the bottom of the page are some geometrical illustrations of a square and slices of a circle, as Leonardo pursued his never-ending quest to transform geometric shapes into other shapes of the same area and to solve the challenge of squaring a circle. Even the horse seems a bit awed and reverential, as if it is marveling at how Leonardo has scattered around it the evidence of his amazing mind.8





THE PAINTING


Leonardo’s immersion in his preparatory studies, which were driven by his passionate curiosity more than the mere utility of sketching out a painting, meant that he was not progressing as fast as the Signoria would have liked. At one point a pay dispute erupted. When he went to get his monthly fee, the cashier gave it to him in small coins. Leonardo refused the money. “I am no penny-painter,” he objected. As the tension escalated, he raised money from some friends so he could pay back his fee and abandon the project, but the gonfaloniere of the Signoria, Piero Soderini (brother of the diplomat who had negotiated with Borgia), refused the repayment and convinced Leonardo to go back to work.

A revised contract was signed by Leonardo and witnessed by his friend Machiavelli in May 1504. By then the Florentines were beginning to worry about Leonardo’s proclivity to procrastinate, so they wrote into the new contract that he would have to repay all his fees and forfeit all the work he had done if he did not finish by February 1505. The document declared:

Several months ago Leonardo, son of Ser Piero da Vinci, and a Florentine citizen, undertook to do a painting for the Sala del Consiglio Grande, and seeing that this painting has already been begun as a cartoon by the said Leonardo, he moreover having received on such account 35 florins, and desiring that the work be concluded as soon as possible . . . the Signoria have resolved that Leonardo da Vinci is to have completely finished painting and brought it wholly to perfection by the end of next February without quibble or objection. . . . And in the event that Leonardo shall not have finished in the stipulated time, then the Signoria can compel him by whatever means appropriate to repay all the money received in connection with this work and Leonardo would be obliged to make over to the said Signoria as much as had been done.9

Soon after signing this new contract, Leonardo constructed a scissors-like platform that, Vasari reported, “was raised by contracting it and lowered by expanding.” He requisitioned eighty-eight pounds of flour to make a paste with which to stick up his preparatory cartoon and the ingredients for whitewash to prepare the wall. After spending a few months at the end of the year on his swamp-draining and military mission to Piombino, he returned to the Battle of Anghiari in early 1505.

As with The Last Supper, Leonardo wanted to paint his mural using oil-based pigments and glazes, which enabled him to create luminous illusions. Oil permitted him to paint more slowly, with finer brushstrokes and greater nuance of color and shadow transitions, which would have been particularly suited for the hazy and dusty atmospheric effects he intended for the Battle of Anghiari.10 Because there were already signs that his use of oil on dry plaster was causing The Last Supper to flake away, Leonardo experimented with new techniques. Unfortunately, painting on walls was one endeavor where his quest for innovation and scientific experimentation repeatedly failed him.

For the Battle of Anghiari, he treated the plaster wall with what he called Greek pitch (“pece grecha per la pictura”), probably a dark residue of distilled turpentine or a mix of resin and wax. His list of provisions also included almost twenty pounds of linseed oil. His small experiments with these materials seemed to work, so he became confident he could use them for the entire mural. But almost immediately he noticed that his mixtures were not sticking well. One early biographer said that Leonardo was cheated by his supplier and that the linseed oil was faulty. To dry the pigments and perhaps concentrate the oil, Leonardo lit a fire below his painting.

The February 1505 deadline came and went with the painting not close to completion. He was still making his delicate oil brushstrokes on the wall in June when all was almost ruined by a torrential rainstorm. “Friday the 6th of June, 1505, at the stroke of the thirteenth hour I began to paint in the palace,” he recorded in a notebook. His brief description of the scene is unclear, but it seems to indicate that the storm caused great leaks that overwhelmed the vessels used to remove the water. “As I lowered the brush, the weather changed for the worse and the bell started to toll, calling the men to the court. The cartoon was torn, water poured down, and the vessel of water that was being carried broke. Suddenly the weather became even worse and it rained very heavily till nightfall.”11

This entry is considered by some a notarial recording of the momentous day he first began painting the Battle of Anghiari, but I think not. He had signed his new contract and requisitioned materials a year earlier, and he had probably been working on and off since then. There is no other case when he recorded the moment of starting or finishing a painting, but he regularly wrote about storms, deluges, and other weather phenomena that stimulated his apocalyptic imagination. I suspect his notebook entry was prompted by the storm rather than some painting milestone.

Vasari, who saw Leonardo’s unfinished painting, described it vividly:

An old soldier in a red cap, crying out, grips the staff with one hand, and, raising a scimitar with the other, furiously aims a blow to cut off both the hands of those who, gnashing their teeth in the struggle, are striving in utmost fierceness to defend their banner. On the ground, between the legs of the horses, there are two figures that are fighting together, and the one on the ground has over him a soldier who has raised his arm as high as possible, that thus with greater force he may plunge a dagger into his throat, in order to end his life; while the other, struggling with his legs and arms, is doing what he can to escape death. It is not possible to describe the invention that Leonardo showed in the garments of the soldiers, all varied by him in different ways, and likewise in the helmet crests and other ornaments; not to mention the incredible mastery that he displayed in the forms and lineaments of the horses, which Leonardo, with their fiery spirit, muscles, and shapely beauty, drew better than any other master.

In trying to complete this painting and make it stick to the wall that summer of 1505, Leonardo could feel the presence of a younger man looking over his shoulder, both literally and figuratively. Preparing to paint a competing mural in the room was the rising star of Florence’s art world, Michelangelo Buonarroti.





MICHELANGELO


When Leonardo left Florence for Milan in 1482, Michelangelo was only seven years old. His father was a member of Florence’s minor nobility who subsisted on small public appointments, his mother had died, and he was living in the countryside with the family of a stonecutter. During the seventeen years that Leonardo was away in Milan, Michelangelo became Florence’s hot new artist. He was apprenticed to the thriving Florence workshop of the painter Domenico Ghirlandaio, won the patronage of the Medici, and traveled to Rome in 1496, where he carved his Pietà, showing Mary grieving over the body of Jesus.

By 1500 the two artists were back in Florence. Michelangelo, then twenty-five, was a celebrated but petulant sculptor, and Leonardo, forty-eight, was a genial and generous painter who had a following of friends and young students. It is enticing to think of what might have occurred if Michelangelo had treated him as a mentor. But that did not happen. As Vasari reported, he displayed instead “a very great disdain” toward Leonardo.

One day Leonardo was walking with a friend through one of the central piazzas of Florence wearing one of his distinctive rose-pink (rosato) tunics. There was a small group discussing a passage from Dante, and they asked Leonardo his opinion of its meaning. At that moment Michelangelo came by, and Leonardo suggested that he might be able to explain it. Michelangelo took offense, as if Leonardo were mocking him. “No, explain it yourself,” he shot back. “You are the one who modelled a horse to be cast in bronze, was unable to do it, and was forced to give up the attempt in shame.” He then turned and walked away. On another occasion when Michelangelo encountered Leonardo, he again referred to the fiasco of the Sforza horse monument, saying, “So those idiot [caponi] Milanese actually believed in you?”12

Unlike Leonardo, Michelangelo was often contentious. He had once insulted the young artist Pietro Torrigiano, who was drawing alongside him in a Florence chapel; Torrigiano recalled “clenching my fist and giving him such a blow on the nose that I felt bone and cartilage go down like biscuit beneath my knuckles.” Michelangelo had a disfigured nose for the rest of his life. Combined with his slightly hunched back and unwashed appearance, that made him a contrast to the handsome, muscular, and stylish Leonardo. Michelangelo’s rivalries extended to many other artists, including Pietro Perugino, whom he called a “clumsy [ goffo] artist”; Perugino unsuccessfully sued him for defamation.

“Leonardo was handsome, urbane, eloquent and dandyishly well dressed,” wrote Michelangelo’s biographer Martin Gayford. “In contrast, Michelangelo was neurotically secretive.” He was also “intense, disheveled, and irascible,” according to another biographer, Miles Unger. He had powerful feelings of love and hate toward those around him but few close companions or protégés. “My delight is in melancholy,” Michelangelo once confessed.13

Whereas Leonardo was disinterested in personal religious practice, Michelangelo was a pious Christian who found himself convulsed by the agony and the ecstasy of faith. They were both gay, but Michelangelo was tormented and apparently imposed celibacy on himself, whereas Leonardo was quite comfortable and open about having male companions. Leonardo took delight in clothes, sporting colorful short tunics and fur-lined cloaks. Michelangelo was ascetic in dress and demeanor; he slept in his dusty studio, rarely bathed or removed his dog-skin shoes, and dined on bread crusts. “How could he fail to envy and detest the easy charm, the elegance, refinement, amiable sweetness of manner, dilettantism, and above all the skepticism of Leonardo, a man of another generation, said to be without religious faith, around whom there constantly strutted a crowd of beautiful pupils, led by the insufferable Salai?” wrote Serge Bramly.14

Fig. 97. Michelangelo’s David.



Soon after his return to Florence, Michelangelo was commissioned to turn a hulking and imperfect piece of white marble into a statue of the biblical Goliath-slayer, David. Working with his usual secrecy, by early 1504 he had produced the most famous statue ever carved (fig. 97). Seventeen feet high and dazzlingly bright, it instantly eclipsed all previous statues of David, including the pretty-boy version by Verrocchio for which the youthful Leonardo served as a model. Verrocchio and others had portrayed David as a young boy in triumph, often with Goliath’s head at his feet. But Michelangelo showed him as a man, starkly nude, as he prepared to go into the fight. His stare is alert, his brow determined. He stands, with an air of affected casualness, in a contrapposto position, his weight on one leg, the other thrust forward. As Leonardo did in painting, Michelangelo showed the body in motion, torso twisting gently to the right, neck to the left. Though David seems relaxed, we can sense the tension in the muscles of his neck and see the veins bulging on the back of his right hand.

Florence’s leaders were then faced with the question of where to place this astonishing colossus. The issue was so contentious that there was even an outbreak of stone-throwing by some protestors. Being a republic, Florence formed a committee. Thirty or so artists and civic leaders were convened to discuss the issue, including Filippino Lippi, Perugino, Botticelli, and of course Leonardo. They gathered on January 25, 1504, in a meeting room near the Duomo, in sight of the finished statue, and considered nine locations, two of which became finalists.

Michelangelo originally hoped that his statue would stand outside the entrance to the cathedral on the Piazza del Duomo, but he soon realized that it was better as a civic symbol of Florence and urged that it be placed in the piazza in front of the Palazzo della Signoria. Giuliano da Sangallo, who was one of Florence’s best architects as well as a sculptor, favored a site underneath the wide-arched Loggia della Signoria, a building on the corner of the piazza. He and his supporters made the argument that tucking the David there would best protect it from the elements, but that choice also had the effect of making it less prominent, dominant, and visible. “We will go to see it, and not have the figure come to see us,” said another supporter of the loggia location.

Not surprisingly, Leonardo came down on the side of stashing it inside the portico. When it was his turn to speak, he said, “I agree that it should be in the Loggia, as Giuliano has said, but on the parapet where they hang the tapestries.” Clearly, he preferred that Michelangelo’s statue be put in an inconspicuous space.15

Fig. 98. Leonardo’s notebook sketch of Michelangelo’s David.



Leonardo went on to add something surprising. He argued that the statue be installed “with decent ornament [chon ornamento decente].” It was clear what he meant. Michelangelo had sculpted David unabashedly naked, with prominent pubic hair and genitalia. Leonardo suggested that a decent ornament should be attached “in such a way that it does not spoil the ceremonies of the officials.” In his notebook at the time, he drew a small sketch based on Michelangelo’s David (fig. 98). Look carefully, and you can see what he is suggesting; he has discreetly covered David’s genitals with what looks like a bronze leaf.16

Leonardo was not generally prudish about nudity. From his Vitruvian Man to his portraits of Salai, he merrily drew naked men, and in his notebooks he once wrote that the penis should be displayed unashamedly. Indeed, a red-chalk and ink nude he drew in 1504, around the time of the statue placement discussions, seems to combine, in a psychologically interesting way, the fleshy face of Salai, then twenty-four, with the muscular physiognomy of Michelangelo’s David (fig.31).17 He also did sketches of a nude and muscular Hercules, front and back, that were probably for a statue he hoped someday to make as a counterpoint to David.18 Yet there was something about Michelangelo’s version of muscular, intrusive male nudity that Leonardo found disagreeable.

Michelangelo won the battle of placement. His David was carefully rolled from his workshop over a four-day period and installed at the entrance of the Palazzo della Signoria. It stayed there until 1873, when it was moved inside the Accademia Gallery, and in 1910 a replica was placed in front of what had by then been renamed the Palazzo Vecchio. But Leonardo won his argument that a “decent ornament” should be added. A gilded garland made of brass and twenty-eight copper leaves was strapped on, covering David’s genitals. It stayed there for at least forty years.19





THE COMPETITION


As soon as his statue of David was placed in the most prominent spot in Florence’s civic plaza, Michelangelo was commissioned to paint a battle scene that would be a companion to Leonardo’s in the great hall. To the Signoria and its leader Soderini, the decision was a conscious effort to play off the rivalry between the era’s two greatest artists. Accounts from the time all use the same word for it: concorrenza, or competition. At the funeral of Soderini years later, a eulogist praised him by saying, “To stage a competition with Leonardo, he assigned Michelangelo that other wall, where Michelangelo, to conquer him, began to paint.” The near contemporary artist and writer Benvenuto Cellini, in praising Michelangelo’s cartoon, stated, “He made it in competition with another artist, Leonardo da Vinci.”20 And Vasari used the same word: “While that rarest of painters Leonardo da Vinci was painting in the Great Council Hall, Piero Soderini, then Gonfalonier, because of the great ability he saw in Michelangelo, got part of that Hall allocated to him; which was how it came about that he did the other façade in competition with Leonardo.”

The subject assigned to Michelangelo was another of Florence’s rare battlefield victories, this one over Pisa in the Battle of Cascina in 1364. Like Leonardo, he failed to complete his painting, and once again we know it only through copies of the full-scale preparatory cartoon he drew, including one made by his pupil Bastiano da Sangallo (fig. 99).

Fig. 99. A copy of Michelangelo’s lost Battle of Cascina.



Rather than focusing on a climactic event, as Leonardo did with his battle for the standard, Michelangelo chose to portray an oddly tangential scene, one that featured more than a dozen muscular and naked men. This is the moment when Florence’s soldiers were bathing in the Arno River and received an alarm that the enemy was attacking, causing them to scramble up the banks and grab their clothes. A rare event in military history that centered on nude wet men, it was a scene suited for Michelangelo, who had never been to war or seen a battle but was infatuated with the male body. “In all his works Michelangelo was drawn to the nude,” Jonathan Jones wrote. “Here, he flaunted it as an obsession—drew attention to his habit, dramatized his penchant. . . . Anyone who hadn’t registered before that young Michelangelo was utterly besotted with the bodies of men was certainly going to notice now.”21

Leonardo rarely criticized other painters,22 but after seeing Michelangelo’s bathing nudes he repeatedly disparaged what he called the “anatomical painter.” Clearly referring to his rival, he mocked those who “draw their nude figures looking like wood, devoid of grace, so that you would think you were looking at a sack of walnuts rather than the human form, or a bundle of radishes rather than the muscles of figures.” The phrase un sacco di noce amused him; he used it more than once in his attacks on Michelangelo’s muscular nudes. “You should not make all the muscles of the body too conspicuous . . . otherwise you will produce a sack of walnuts rather than a human figure.”23

Therein lay another difference between the two artists. Michelangelo tended to specialize in muscular male nudes; even when he painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel a few years later he included twenty ignudi, athletic nude males, as corner figures. Leonardo, on the contrary, prided himself on the “universal” nature of his subjects. He believed “The painter should aim at universality, because there is a great want of self-respect in doing one thing well and another badly, as many do who study only the nude figure and do not seek after variety,” Leonardo wrote. “This is a defect that demands stern reprehension.”24 He could certainly draw and paint male nudes, but his virtuosity came from his imagination and inventiveness, which required diversity and fantasy. “Let the painter composing narrative pictures take pleasure in variety,” he directed.25

Leonardo’s broader critique of Michelangelo was his argument that painting is a higher form of art than sculpture. In a passage written just after the showdown of battles in the Florentine hall, Leonardo argued:

Painting embraces and contains within itself all things perceptible in nature, which the poverty of sculpture cannot do, such as show the colors of all things and their diminution. The painter will demonstrate various distances by the variation of color of the air interposed between objects and the eye. He will demonstrate how the species of objects penetrate mists with difficulty. He will demonstrate how mountains and valleys are seen through clouds in the rain. He will demonstrate dust itself, and how the combatants raise a commotion in it.26

Leonardo, of course, was referring to Michelangelo’s sculptures, but judging from the extant copies his criticism also applied to Michelangelo’s Battle of Cascina and even some of his finished paintings. In other words, he painted like a sculptor. Michelangelo was good at delineating forms with the use of sharp lines, but he showed little skill with the subtleties of sfumato, shadings, refracted lights, soft visuals, or changing color perspectives. He freely admitted that he preferred the chisel to the brush. “I am not in the right place, and I am not a painter,” he confessed in a poem when he embarked on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel a few years later.27

A look at Michelangelo’s oil and tempera panel painting Doni Tondo (fig.100), done around the time of the Signoria competition, shows the difference between the styles of the two men. Michelangelo seems to have been influenced by the cartoon Leonardo had done for the Virgin and Child with Saint Anne, which had caused a sensation when displayed in Florence. Michelangelo’s version has a similar narrative feel, with the characters twisting in a tight configuration. But there the similarities end. Michelangelo prominently includes Joseph; for reasons best left to Freud, Leonardo never conspicuously featured Joseph in any of his art. Though vividly colored, Michelangelo’s three main figures seem sculpted rather than painted; they are lifeless, and their expressions lack charm or mystery. His background features not nature but his favorite motif: male nudes, lounging languorously and a bit pointlessly, even though there is no river for them to bathe in. They are in sharp focus, with no sign of Leonardo’s understanding of atmospheric or distance perspective. “He had no use for Leonardo’s famous sfumato,” writes Unger. Gayford calls Doni Tondo “almost a rebuttal in paint of Leonardo’s ideas.”28

Fig. 100. Michelangelo’s Doni Tondo.



Michelangelo’s painting has the sharp, delineated outlines that Leonardo, with his love of sfumato and blurred borders, scorned as a matter of philosophy, optics, mathematics, and aesthetics. To define objects, Michelangelo used lines rather than following Leonardo’s practice of using shadows, which is why Michelangelo’s look flat rather than three-dimensional. The sharply lined contours are also featured in his Battle of Cascina, as shown in some of his preparatory studies. It is as if he had looked at Leonardo’s method of creating a dusty and hazy battle scene blurred by motion, as well as the sfumatura in Leonardo’s other works, and decided to do just the opposite. Their divergent approaches represent two schools in Florentine art: that of Leonardo, Andrea del Sarto, Raphael, Fra Bartolomeo, and others who emphasized the use of sfumato and chiaroscuro, and the more traditional approach taken by Michelangelo, Agnolo Bronzino, Alessandro Allori, and others who favored a disegno based on outlined contours.29





ABANDONED


In the spring of 1505, with his painting for Florence’s council hall not yet begun, Michelangelo accepted a summons from Pope Julius II to Rome to sculpt a tomb. As if energized by Michelangelo’s absence, Leonardo threw himself into painting his battle scene. But then the temperamental Michelangelo had a temporary falling out with the pope, who he felt was not being deferential enough. (Artists such as Leonardo and Michelangelo were reaching such a status that popes and marchesas had to defer to them on occasion.) “You can tell the pope that if he wants me from now on, he can seek me elsewhere,” Michelangelo declared, and returned to Florence around April 1506.

His presence back in Florence unnerved Leonardo, who as usual was both procrastinating and having difficulty getting his oil-based paint mixtures to adhere to the wall. He would eventually move back to Milan, consigning the Anghiari mural to his long list of abandoned projects. Michelangelo too would leave again, kneeling to ask the pope’s forgiveness and then returning to Rome. He would stay there for another decade and paint the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel.30

So neither painting was ever finished. The final loss of both men’s work came at the hand, ironically, of Vasari, the painter-biographer who lionized them. He was commissioned in the 1560s to renovate the great hall, where he painted six battle scenes of his own. In recent years, a group of experts, including the high-technology art diagnostician Maurizio Seracini, discovered some evidence that Leonardo’s partial painting may still exist under one of Vasari’s. Tiny holes drilled into Vasari’s work revealed pigments on the wall underneath that may be from Leonardo’s painting. But authorities have resisted requests to allow further investigations that might harm Vasari’s mural.31

Once again we have to wrestle with the reasons Leonardo decided to leave a work unfinished. The proximate cause was the problems he had with his materials. “Conceiving the wish to color on the wall in oils,” Vasari reported, “he made a composition of so gross an admixture to act as a binder on the wall, that when he painted, it began to peel off in such a manner that in a short time he abandoned it, seeing it spoiling.”32 Added to that was the unnerving specter of Michelangelo hovering behind him; Leonardo did not have a competitive personality, so he likely did not relish the contest.

There was also a more artistic challenge, I think, that contributed to Leonardo’s decision to abandon the commission. When painting The Last Supper, he became immersed in the difficulty of getting the proper visual perspective in a large mural that would be seen from multiple vantage points in a room. A conventional central-point perspective scheme would have made parts of the scene appear distorted. Other painters would not have noticed, or would have chosen to ignore, the way figures in a large painting could seem disproportionate when viewed from different parts of the room. But Leonardo was obsessed by the optics, mathematics, and art of perspective.

For The Last Supper he had come up with tricks and illusions and artifices to make his work appear realistic from different vantages. He was able to make a preferred vantage point that was far away from the painting; he calculated it would ideally be located ten to twenty times as far away as the painting was wide. But the area that he was supposed to paint in Florence’s council hall was fifty-five feet long, twice that of The Last Supper, and his mural would be viewed from at most seventy feet away, far less than twice its width.

In addition, his painting was supposed to be an outdoor scene lit by broad daylight, unlike The Last Supper, which depicted an enclosed dining room on the wall of an enclosed dining room. The challenges of how to get all of the perspectives from each angle to look believable were combined with the difficulties of showing direct and reflected lighting and shadows in an open-air scene that was to be viewed inside a room. Leonardo had the authorities cut four more windows in the hall, but that did not eliminate the challenge.33

He was a perfectionist faced with challenges other artists would have disregarded but that he could not. So he put down his brushes. That behavior meant he would never again receive a public commission. But it is also what allowed him to go down in history as an obsessed genius rather than merely a reliable master painter.





“SCHOOL OF THE WORLD”


The unfinished battle scenes turned out to be two of the most influential lost paintings in history, and they helped to shape the High Renaissance. “These battle cartoons of Leonardo and Michelangelo are the turning point of the Renaissance,” according to Kenneth Clark.34 They were kept on display in Florence until 1512, and young artists flocked to see them. One of those was the sculptor Cellini, who described the competing display in his autobiography: “These cartoons stood one in the Medici Palace and the other in the Pope’s Hall, and so long as they remained there, they served as the school of the world.”35

Raphael traveled to Florence just to see the two cartoons that had caused such a sensation, Vasari reported, and he drew versions of them. The animated details of both unfinished works spurred the imaginations, and the mannerism, of subsequent generations. “Frenzied faces, monstrous armor, twisting bodies, convoluted poses, masks, and mad horses—between them the two great Council Hall images provided sixteenth-century artists with a banquet of oddities,” Jonathan Jones wrote. “In these fantastical works, two geniuses tried to outdo one another in sheer quiddity.”36

The showdown did more than any paragone could have to raise the status of artists. Leonardo and Michelangelo had become luminaries, paving the way for other artists—who until then had rarely even signed their work—to do the same. When the pope summoned Michelangelo, and when the Milanese vied with the Florentines over the services of Leonardo, it was recognition that super-artists had their own recognizable style, artistic personality, and individual genius. Instead of being treated as somewhat interchangeable members of the craftsman’s class, the best artists were now treated as singular stars.





