CHAPTER 15




* * *





Virgin of the Rocks



THE COMMISSION


When Leonardo first came to Milan in 1482, he had hopes of working primarily as a military and civil engineer, as he had proposed in his letter to the de facto duke, Ludovico Sforza. That did not happen. Most of his work for the court during the ensuing decade was as a theatrical impresario, then as the sculptor of the unfinished horse monument and a consultant on church designs. Yet his primary talent remained that of a painter, as had been the case in Florence and would be so until his final days.

For his first few years in Milan, before he was given space in the Corte Vecchia, he probably shared a studio with Ambrogio de Predis, one of Ludovico’s favorite portrait artists, and his half-brothers, Evangelista and Cristoforo, who was deaf and did not speak. Leonardo later wrote that observing how the deaf communicate was a good way to study the relation between human gestures and thoughts: “Let your figures have actions appropriate to what they are intended to think or say, and these will be well learned by imitating the deaf, who by the motion of their hands, eyes, eyebrows, and the whole body, endeavor to express the sentiments of their mind.”1

Soon after Leonardo began working with the de Predis brothers, they were jointly given a commission by the Confraternity of the Immaculate Conception, a worship group of rich laymen, to paint altarpieces for the Franciscan church that it used. To Leonardo fell the task of painting the central frame, and his instructions were explicit: it was to feature the Virgin Mary (“her skirt shall be of gold brocade over crimson, in oil, varnished with fine lacquer”) and baby Jesus surrounded by “angels done in oil to complete perfection, with the two Prophets.” Ignoring these instructions, he decided to paint the Virgin Mary, the baby Jesus, a young John the Baptist, one angel, and no prophets. The scene he chose came from Apocrypha and medieval stories of the Holy Family meeting John on the road to Egypt as they fled Bethlehem after King Herod ordered the Massacre of the Innocents.

Leonardo ended up producing two similar versions of the painting, which became known as the Virgin of the Rocks. Reams of scholarship have been produced debating the timing and backstories of these paintings. The most convincing narrative, I believe, is that the first version, done in the 1480s, led to a price dispute with the confraternity and was sold or sent elsewhere; it is now in the Louvre (fig. 64). Leonardo then helped to paint a replacement version, in collaboration with Ambrogio de Predis and his studio, completed sometime around 1508; it is the one now in the National Gallery of London (fig. 65).2

The confraternity wanted a painting that would celebrate the Immaculate Conception, a doctrine pushed by the Franciscans asserting that the Virgin Mary was conceived free from all stain of original sin.3 Some of the iconography in the Virgin of the Rocks supports that idea, most notably the setting: a grotto of barren and dramatic rock formations that magically spawns flowering plants and four holy figures. We feel we are looking into the womb of the earth. The figures in front of the cave are bathed in warm light, but the shadowy inside is dark and intimidating. The locale harks back to Leonardo’s recollection about coming across the mouth of a mysterious cave while hiking.

The scene is not, however, an obvious evocation of the Immaculate Conception. Even though the Virgin Mary is the central figure, the narrative of the picture centers on John the Baptist, who was the patron saint of Florence and one of Leonardo’s favorite subjects. The focus on John is especially true in the first (Louvre) version of the picture, where the angel is dramatically pointing to him, and that may have been one source of the friction between Leonardo and the confraternity.





THE FIRST VERSION (LOUVRE)


Leonardo was a master at storytelling and conveying a sense of dramatic motion, and like many of his paintings, beginning with the Adoration of the Magi, the Virgin of the Rocks is a narrative. In his first version of the painting, the androgynous curly-haired angel begins the narrative by looking out directly from the scene, catching our eye, smiling enigmatically, and pointing to make us look at the baby Saint John. John in turn is dropping to his knees and clasping his hands in reverence toward the baby Jesus, who returns the gesture with a sign of blessing. The Madonna, her body twisted in motion, glances down at John and grasps his shoulder protectively while hovering her other hand over Jesus. And as our eyes finish a clockwise rotation of the scene, we notice the left hand of the angel holding Jesus as he leans on the rocky precipice over a pond, his hand touching the ledge. Taken in as a whole, it becomes a sequential medley of hand gestures presaging The Last Supper.

The angel’s pointing finger is the main feature that distinguishes the first version from the second. Thanks to modern technology, we know that Leonardo wrestled with the question of including this gesture. In 2009 technicians at the Louvre deployed an advanced set of infrared imaging techniques on the first version of the Virgin of the Rocks, which revealed an underdrawing that Leonardo used to compose the painting. It shows that when he began, he did not plan to have the angel pointing at John. That gesture was added only after most of the background rocks had been painted.4 Leonardo twice reversed himself, perhaps under pressure from his patrons. The pointing gesture is not in the original underdrawing, is in the first version of the painting, and is not in the second version.

His hesitancy is understandable. The pointing gesture is awkward, and Leonardo seems to have sensed it when he did his second version. The angel’s bony finger disrupts, in a jarring way, the connection between the Madonna’s hovering hand and the head of her baby. The medley of hands becomes a cacophony of competing gestures.5

Fig. 64. Virgin of the Rocks (first version, Louvre).



Fig. 65. Virgin of the Rocks (second version, London).



The narrative flow is rescued by the fluid areas of light, which give the painting a sense of unity. In this masterpiece, Leonardo ushered in a new era of art in which light and shade are juxtaposed in a manner that produces a powerful sense of flow.

In Florence, Leonardo had edged away from using mainly tempera paints and had begun to rely more on oils, as had become the practice in the Netherlands, and in Milan he perfected his use of that medium. The ability to slowly apply thin layer upon layer of translucent color allowed him to create the shadings and gentle blurring of outlines that characterized his chiaroscuro and sfumato techniques. It also allowed him to produce luminous tones. The light would pass through the layers and reflect back from the primer coat, making it seem as if the light was emanating from the figures and objects themselves.6

Most artists prior to Leonardo differentiated the brightly lit areas of a painting from the shaded areas by adding more white pigment to their colors. But Leonardo knew that light doesn’t merely brighten a color; it also reveals better its true and deep tones. Look at where the sunlight strikes the angel’s red cloak and the Madonna’s blue gown and golden drapery; the colors are saturated and the tones richer. In his notes for a treatise on painting, Leonardo explained, “Since the quality of color is revealed by means of light, where there is more light will be seen more of the true quality of the illuminated color.”7

The first version of the Virgin of the Rocks is a vivid example of Leonardo’s using his knowledge of science to inform his art. Its subject is both the Virgin and the rocks. As Ann Pizzorusso pointed out in her study “Leonardo’s Geology,” the components of the grotto “are rendered with astounding geological accuracy.”8 Most of the formations are of weathered sandstone, a sedimentary rock. But just above the Virgin’s head, and also at the top right of the picture, are jutting hard-edged rock formations, with facets that glimmer in the sun. These are diabase, an intrusive igneous rock formed by the cooling of volcanic lava. Even the vertical cracks caused by the cooling are rendered precisely. So is the seam between the sandstone and igneous formation, running horizontally just above the Virgin’s head. This is not merely a case of Leonardo’s faithfully rendering a scene he saw in nature. The grotto is clearly a product of his imagination, not an actual place he visited. It took a deep appreciation of geology to conjure up a vision that was both so imaginative and so real.

The plants in the picture are located, as they would be in nature, only in the sandstone regions that have weathered sufficiently to permit roots to take hold, both at the top and the floor of the grotto, but not in the hard igneous rocks. The species chosen are botanically and seasonally correct: he depicted only those that would be found in a moist grotto at the same time of year. Yet within these constraints, he was able to choose plants that conveyed his symbolic and artistic aims. As William Emboden demonstrated in his study Leonardo da Vinci on Plants and Gardens, “he introduced them into his paintings for their symbolic language, and yet he was careful to portray them in their proper setting.”9

For example, a white rose is often used to symbolize the purity of Christ, but it would not have grown in such a grotto; so Leonardo instead paints underneath Christ’s raised arm a primrose (Primula vulgaris), regarded as a sign of virtue because of its white flowers. Faintly discernible above the Virgin’s left hand is a swirl of Galium verum. “The plant has long been known as Our Lady’s Bedstraw and is traditionally the plant of the manger,” Emboden wrote. Joseph used it to make Mary’s bed, and its white leaves turned to gold when Jesus was born. Leonardo, who was obsessed with spirals and swirls, sometimes slightly altered plants to suit his artistic tastes. For example, at the lower left of the picture is a yellow flag iris (Iris pseudacorus) that is depicted with its sword-like leaves not lined up like a fan but slightly contorted to show a spiral pattern, twisting to reflect the subtle turning motions of Saint John and the Virgin.

By the time this first version of the painting was finished, in 1485, Leonardo and his partners had received payments totaling around 800 lire. But a prolonged dispute began when the painters insisted they had spent more than that on materials, especially the gold gilding, and that the work was worth far more. The confraternity balked, and the painting was probably never installed in their church. Instead, it was either sold to another client, perhaps the French king Louis XII, or paid for by Ludovico Sforza as a wedding gift for his niece Bianca and the future Holy Roman emperor Maximilian I. It eventually made its way into the Louvre.





THE SECOND VERSION (LONDON)


During the 1490s, Leonardo worked with Ambrogio de Predis on a new version of Virgin of the Rocks for the Confraternity of the Immaculate Conception, to replace the one that had not been delivered. According to the technical studies reported in 2009, Leonardo began with a far different underdrawing. It featured a kneeling Virgin Mary in a posture of adoration, with one hand across her breast. But then Leonardo changed his mind. He covered the new underdrawing with primer and drew another, one that very closely resembles the first version of Virgin of the Rocks, except that (as in the original underdrawing for the first version) the angel is not pointing at John the Baptist.10 In addition, the angel is not peering out from the picture at the viewer. Instead, his dreamy gaze seems to take in the whole scene.

As a result, the narrative is not as distracting. The Virgin Mary becomes the unchallenged center of attention. Our eyes start on her serene face as she watches John kneel, and her hand hovers protectively over her child, this time not interrupted by the angel’s intruding finger. The scene becomes one that features the gestures and emotions of the Virgin rather than the angel or John.

Another subtle difference is that the grotto is more closed and there is less sky above. The light is therefore not as diffused but instead comes in directionally as a beam from the left side of the painting, selectively falling upon and highlighting the four characters. As a result, the modeling, plasticity, and three-dimensionality of the shapes are deeply enhanced. Between the first and second versions, Leonardo had been studying light and optics, and the result is an artistic use of light that was new in the history of art. “In its dynamic qualities of variability and selectivity, in contrast to the static, even universal light of the Louvre version, it is the light of a new era,” wrote the art historian John Shearman.11

The composition of this second version was clearly the work of Leonardo. The question arises, however, how much of the actual painting, which may have been done over the course of almost fifteen years, was by him and how much was delegated to Ambrogio and the assistants at the studio.

One indication that Leonardo delegated some of the work is that the plants are not as authentic as in the first version. “It’s very striking, because they go against everything that Leonardo’s always done in terms of his botanical art,” according to horticulturalist John Grimshaw. “They’re not real flowers. They’re odd concoctions, like a half-imagined aquilegia.”12 The same divergences can be found in the geology. “The rocks in the National Gallery painting are synthetic, stilted, grotesque characterizations,” Pizzorusso wrote. “The rocks in the foreground are not finely bedded but are roughly weathered and massive, giving the appearance of limestone rather than sandstone. The presence of limestone would be incongruous in this geological setting.”13

Up until 2010, London’s National Gallery had stated that its version was not primarily from Leonardo’s hand. But after a thorough cleaning and restoration of the painting, the gallery’s then-curator Luke Syson and other experts declared that it was in fact painted mainly by Leonardo. Syson conceded that there are lapses in the accuracy of some of the plants and rocks, but he claimed this reflects a more mature and “metaphysical” way of depicting nature that Leonardo began to pursue in the 1490s: “This is no longer a picture just about devout naturalism. Leonardo combined those ingredients he regarded as essential (sometimes simply the most beautiful) to generate things—plants, landscapes, people—which were even more perfect, more completely themselves, than Nature had made.”14

Especially when viewed after its recent cleaning, the London version does indeed display hallmarks that appear to be by Leonardo’s hand. This is true of the angel, whose characteristic radiant curls seem distinctively his, and whose sheer sleeve caught by the sun rays is rendered with a remarkable translucence that comes from Leonardo’s talent for applying thin layers of oil. “No one who has looked at it closely can doubt who was responsible for the mouth and chin, and the characteristic curves of the golden hair,” Kenneth Clark wrote of the angel.15 It is also true of the Virgin’s head, which like that of the angel suggests the use of Leonardo’s characteristic finger blending of paint. “All these effects lie definitively outside Ambrogio’s range, or that of any other known pupil,” according to Martin Kemp.16

This second version of the painting, like the first, was caught up in contractual disputes with the confraternity, and the prolonged negotiation offers further evidence that Leonardo was personally involved in finishing the painting. It was still deemed incomplete by the time he left Milan in 1499, and in 1506 there was another tussle over whether a final payment was due. Leonardo ended up coming back to put finishing touches on the painting. Only then was it finally deemed complete, after which he and Ambrogio received their concluding payment from the confraternity.





TEAMWORK


The questions about what contributions Leonardo’s colleagues made to the second Virgin of the Rocks highlight the role that collaboration played in his studio. We tend to think of artists as lone creators, holed in a garret, waiting for inspiration to strike. But as evident in his notebooks and in the process that led to his drawing of Vitruvian Man, much of Leonardo’s thinking was collegial. Ever since his salad days in the art-production bottega run by Verrocchio, Leonardo knew the joys and advantages of having a team. According to Larry Keith, who led the restoration of the National Gallery’s Virgin of the Rocks, “Leonardo’s need to quickly create a studio capable of producing paintings, sculpture, courtly entertainments and other activities meant that he worked closely with established Milanese painters as well as training his own apprentices.”17

In order to make money, Leonardo at times helped his apprentices produce pieces as if on an assembly line, as had been the practice in Verrocchio’s studio. “Designs circulated between master and pupil using a kind of cut and paste technique involving master drawings and cartoons,” Syson explained.18 Leonardo would create the compositions, cartoons, studies, and sketches. His students would copy them with pinpricks and work together on painting the finished version, often with Leonardo adding his own touches and making corrections. There were sometimes many variations, and different styles can be discerned in a single painting. One visitor to his studio described how “two of Leonardo’s pupils were doing some portraits and he from time to time put a touch on them.”19

Leonardo’s apprentices and students did not merely copy his designs. A show at the Louvre in 2012 featured paintings that students and assistants in his workshop did of his masterpieces. Many were variations that were produced alongside his original, indicating that he and his colleagues were together exploring various alternative approaches to the planned painting. While Leonardo worked on the master version, other versions were being painted under his supervision.20





HEAD OF A YOUNG WOMAN


Depending on which religious stories you take as the text, the angel in Virgin of the Rocks is supposed to be either Gabriel or Uriel. (He’s identified on the Louvre website as Gabriel, but the description next to the painting in the museum itself calls him Uriel, proving there is no consensus even within that museum.) Either way, Leonardo’s drawing of him is so feminine that even some art critics have referred to him as a female.21

The angel, like the one he painted for Verrocchio’s Baptism of Christ, is an example of Leonardo’s proclivity for gender fluidity. Some nineteenth-century critics saw it as a mark of his homosexuality, especially since the positioning and outward gaze of the disturbingly alluring angel make him seem a proxy for the artist.22

The androgynous nature of the figure is heightened by comparing the angel to what is generally regarded as a preparatory study for it, a drawing by Leonardo, called Head of a Young Woman (fig. 66).23 The facial features of the young woman are virtually identical to those of Uriel/Gabriel.

Fig. 66. Study for Virgin of the Rocks.



The drawing is fascinating because it is one of the best displays of Leonardo’s genius as a draftsman. With a few simple lines and brilliant strokes, concise and precise, he is able to create a sketch of unsurpassed beauty. At first glance it captivates you, then its deceptive simplicity draws you into a prolonged and profound engagement. The pioneering Renaissance art historian Bernard Berenson called it “one of the finest achievements of all draftsmanship,” and his protégé Kenneth Clark proclaimed it “one of the most beautiful, I dare say, in the world.”24

Leonardo sometimes used ink or chalk for his drawings, but in this case he used a silverpoint stylus to incise lines on paper that he had coated with a pale pigment. The grooves are still visible. For highlights, such as the luster on her left cheekbone, he used a white gouache, or watercolor.

The drawing is an exquisite example of Leonardo’s use of hatching to create shadows and texture. These parallel strokes are delicate and tight in some places (the shadow on her left cheek) and bold and spacious in others (her back shoulder). The variations in the hatching allow, with just simple strokes, wondrous gradations of shadow and subtle blurring of contours. Look at the nose and marvel at how the hatching models the left nostril. Then look how slightly wider lines make the contour and shadow of her left cheek. The two strong lines creasing her neck and the three strokes delineating the front of her neck seem hasty, but they also convey motion. The free-form curves to the left and right of her head look modernist, yet what they reveal is Leonardo’s brainstorming process as it flows through his pen. As the abstract lines cascade down the back of her neck, they hint at the signature curls that he will paint.

And then there are the eyes, which Leonardo made magically liquid. Her right eye has a rounded pupil with a full-on stare, but her left eyelid is heavy, pushing down over the pupil, as if she’s dreamily disengaged. Like the angel in the Louvre’s Virgin of the Rocks, she stares out at us even as her left eye drifts. As you walk back and forth, her eyes follow you. She drinks you in.





