CHAPTER 22




* * *





Paintings Lost and Found



LEDA AND THE SWAN


One of the veils blurring our knowledge of Leonardo is the mystery surrounding the authenticity and dates of some of his paintings, including ones we think are lost and others we think are finds. Like most artist-craftsmen of his era, he did not sign his work. Although he copiously documented trivial items in his notebooks, including the amount he spent on food and on Salai’s clothes, he did not record what he was painting, what he had completed, and where his works went. For some paintings we have detailed contracts and disputes to inform us; for others we have to rely on a snippet from the sometimes reliable Vasari or other early chroniclers.

That means we need to look at copies done by his followers to envision works now lost, such as the Battle of Anghiari, and to analyze what were thought to be works by his followers to see if they might actually be autograph Leonardos. These endeavors can be frustrating, but even when they do not produce certainty, they can lead to a better understanding of Leonardo, as we saw in the case of La Bella Principessa.

Leda and the Swan is the most tantalizing of Leonardo’s lost paintings. The existence of multiple copies, including from students in his workshop, makes it seem likely that he actually finished his own version. Lomazzo says that a “nude Leda” was one of Leonardo’s few finished paintings, and there seems to be a report of it in 1625 at the French royal chateau of Fontainebleau, where a visitor described “a standing figure of Leda almost totally naked [quasi tutta ignuda], with the swan at her side and two eggs, from whose broken shells come forth four babies.” That sounds like Leonardo’s purported painting, except that Leda, in both his own surviving preparatory drawing and in painted copies, was wholly naked.1 One tale, which is so delicious that it’s a shame it’s probably untrue, is that it was destroyed by Madame de Maintenon, the mistress and secret second wife of Louis XIV, because she found it too salacious.

The myth of Leda and the swan tells how the Greek god Zeus assumed the form of a swan and seduced the beautiful mortal princess Leda. She produced two eggs, from which hatched two sets of twins Helen (later known as Helen of Troy) and Clytemnestra, and Castor and Pollux. Leonardo’s depiction focuses more on fertility than sex; instead of painting the seduction scene, as others had done, he chose to portray the moment of the births, showing Leda caressing the swan as the four children squirm from their shells. One of the most vivid copies is by his pupil Francesco Melzi (fig. 81).

Fig. 81. Francesco Melzi copy of Leda and the Swan.



When Leonardo was working on this painting during his second period in Florence in the early 1500s, he was doing his most intense studies on the flight of birds and also planning a test flight of one of his flying machines, which he hoped to launch from the top of nearby Swan Mountain (Monte Ceceri). His note about his childhood memory of a bird flying into his crib and flapping its tail in his mouth is also from this period.

Leonardo produced a preparatory sketch of his planned painting sometime around 1505 (fig. 82). It shows Leda kneeling and her body twisting as if writhing with joy as the swan nuzzles her. Leonardo’s signature left-handed hatch lines are curved, a technique he started using in his machinery drawings of the 1490s and now used to show volume and modeling of curved surfaces. The technique is especially pronounced in Leda’s opulent belly and the swan’s breast. As usual with Leonardo, the drawing conveys a narrative. As the swan seductively nuzzles Leda, she points to what they have wrought: the children hatching amid the dynamic spirals of the plants. The drawing swirls with motion and energy; no element seems static.

When Leonardo developed the drawing into a full painting, he changed the pose so that Leda was standing and her nude body appeared more lithe and gentle. She is turning her head slightly away from the swan and looking down demurely, yet at the same time she twists her upper body toward him. She caresses his neck; he wraps a wing firmly around her buttocks. Both exude a sensuous and sinuous beauty.

Fig. 82. Leonardo’s preparatory drawing for Leda and the Swan.



That earthly and earthy sexuality makes the picture atypical. A nonreligious narrative panel painting (assuming you do not consider the sexual exploits of Greek gods to be a religious subject), it was Leonardo’s only overtly sexual or erotic scene.

And yet, at least in the copies available to us today, it is not actually very erotic. Leonardo is not Titian. He never painted romance or eros. Instead, two themes dominate. The painting conveys a domestic and familial harmony, a pleasant portrayal of a couple at home by their lake, cuddling as they admire their newborns. It also goes beyond the erotic to focus on the tale’s procreative aspects. From the lushness of the seeding plants, to the fecundity of the soil and the hatching of the eggs, the painting is a celebration of the fertility of nature. Unlike the usual depictions of the Leda myth, Leonardo’s is not about sex but birth.2

These themes of generational and natural renewal apparently resonated with him now that he was in his mid-fifties, with no heirs. Around the time he began to paint Leda, he adopted Francesco Melzi, who painted the Leda copy shown as figure 81, to be his surrogate son and heir.





SALVATOR MUNDI


In 2011 a newly rediscovered painting by Leonardo surprised the art world. Each decade, a dozen or so pieces are proposed or pushed as having a reasonable claim to be previously unknown Leonardos, but only twice before in modern times had such assertions ended up generally accepted: the Benois Madonna oil painting in Moscow’s Hermitage that was publicly revealed in 1909 and the chalk drawing La Bella Principessa that Kemp and others asserted as authentic a century later.

This 2011 addition to the list of autograph works is a painting known as Salvator Mundi (Savior of the World), with Jesus gesturing in blessing with his right hand while holding a solid crystal orb in his left (fig. 83). The Salvator Mundi motif, which features Christ with an orb topped by a cross, known as a globus cruciger, had become very popular by the early 1500s, especially among northern European painters. Leonardo’s version contains some of his distinctive features: a figure that manages to be at once both reassuring and unsettling, a mysterious straight-on stare, an elusive smile, cascading curls, and sfumato softness.

Before the painting was authenticated, there was historic evidence that one like it existed. In the inventory of Salai’s estate was a painting of “Christ in the Manner of God the Father.” Such a piece was catalogued in the collections of the English king Charles I, who was beheaded in 1649, and also Charles II, who restored the monarchy in 1660. The historical trail of Leonardo’s version was lost after the painting passed from Charles II to the Duke of Buckingham, whose son sold it in 1763. But a historic reference remained: the widow of Charles I had commissioned Wenceslaus Hollar to make an etching of the painting. There were also at least twenty copies painted by some of Leonardo’s followers.

Fig. 83. Salvator Mundi.



The trail of the painting reappeared in 1900, when it was acquired by a British collector who did not suspect that it was by Leonardo. It had been damaged, overpainted, and so heavily varnished that it was unrecognizable, and it was attributed to Leonardo’s student Boltraffio. The work was later catalogued as a copy of Boltraffio’s copy. When the collector’s estate sold it at auction in 1958, it fetched less than one hundred dollars.

The painting was sold again in 2005, to a consortium of art dealers and collectors who believed that it might be more than just a copy of a copy of a Leonardo painting. As with the tale of La Bella Principessa, the subsequent authentication process reveals a lot about Leonardo’s work. The consortium brought it to a Manhattan art historian and dealer named Robert Simon, who oversaw a five-year process of cleaning it carefully and quietly showing it to experts.

Among those consulted were Nicholas Penny, then director of London’s National Gallery, and Carmen Bambach of New York’s Metropolitan Museum. It was brought to London in 2008 so that it could be directly compared with the National Gallery’s version of Virgin of the Rocks by other experts, including Luke Syson, who was then curator of Italian paintings at the gallery, David Alan Brown of Washington’s National Gallery of Art, and Pietro Marani, professor of art history at the Politecnico di Milano. And, of course, a call went out to Martin Kemp, who was also then authenticating La Bella Principessa. “We’ve got something I think you would want to look at,” Penny told Kemp. When Kemp saw it, he was struck by the orb and hair. “It had that kind of presence that Leonardos have,” he recalled.3

But it was not merely gut, intuition, and connoisseurship that authenticated Salvator Mundi. The painting duplicated almost precisely the 1650 Wenceslaus Hollar engraving that had been made from the original; it had the same snaking and lustrous curls, the same Leonardesque knot pattern on the sashes, and the irregular pleats on Christ’s blue cloak that are also in Leonardo’s preparatory drawings.

These similarities, however, were not dispositive. There were many copies made by Leonardo’s followers; was it possible that this newly rediscovered painting was also a copy? Technical analysis helped to answer that. After the picture was cleaned, high-resolution photos and X-rays helped reveal a pentimento showing that the thumb of Jesus’ right hand had originally been placed differently. That is not something a copyist would need to do. In addition, shining an infrared light that reflected off the white priming of the panel showed that the painter had pressed his palm against the wet paint above Christ’s left eye to achieve a sfumato blurring, which was a distinctive Leonardo technique. The work had been painted on walnut, just like other Leonardos of the period, in many very thin layers of almost translucent paint. By that point most of the experts agreed that it was an authentic Leonardo. As a result, the art consortium was able to sell it for close to $80 million in 2013 to a Swiss art dealer, who then resold it to a Russian fertilizer billionaire for $127 million.4

Unlike other Salvator Mundi paintings, Leonardo’s offers the viewer shifting emotional interactions, similar to those found in the Mona Lisa. The misty aura and blurred sfumato lines, especially of the lips, produces a psychological mystery and an ambiguous smile that seems to change slightly with each new look. Is there a hint of a smile? Look again. Is Jesus staring at us or into the distance? Move from side to side and ask again.

The curling hair, coiled with energy, seems to spring into motion as it reaches the shoulders, as if Leonardo were painting the eddies of a flowing stream. They become more distinct and less soft as they reach the chest. This stems from his studies of acuity perspective: objects that are closer to a viewer are less blurred.

Around the time he was working on Salvator Mundi, Leonardo was doing his optics studies that explored how the eyes focus.5 He knew that he could create the illusion of three-dimensional depth in a painting by making the objects in the foreground sharper. The two fingers on Christ’s right hand that are closest to us are drawn with a crisper delineation. It makes the hand pop out toward us, as if it’s in motion and giving us a blessing. Leonardo would reuse this technique a few years later with the pointing hands in two depictions of Saint John the Baptist.

There is, however, a puzzling anomaly in the painting, one that seems to be an unusual lapse or unwillingness by Leonardo to link art and science. It involves the clear crystal orb that Jesus is holding. In one respect, it is rendered with beautiful scientific precision. There are three jagged bubbles in it that have the irregular shape of the tiny gaps in crystal called inclusions. Around that time, Leonardo had evaluated rock crystals as a favor for Isabella d’Este, who was planning to purchase some, and he captured accurately the twinkle of inclusions. In addition, he included a deft and scientifically accurate touch, showing he had tried to get the image correct: the part of Jesus’ palm pressing into the bottom of the orb is flattened and lighter, as it would indeed appear in reality.

But Leonardo failed to paint the distortion that would occur when looking through a solid clear orb at objects that are not touching the orb. Solid glass or crystal, whether shaped like an orb or a lens, produces magnified, inverted, and reversed images. Instead, Leonardo painted the orb as if it were a hollow glass bubble that does not refract or distort the light passing through it. At first glance it seems as if the heel of Christ’s palm displays a hint of refraction, but a closer look shows the slight double image occurs even in the part of the hand not behind the orb; it is merely a pentimento that occurred when Leonardo decided to shift slightly the hand’s position.

Christ’s body and the folds of his robe are not inverted or distorted when seen through the orb. At issue is a complex optical phenomenon. Try it with a solid glass ball (fig. 84). A hand touching the orb will not appear to be distorted. But things viewed through the orb that are an inch or so away, such as Christ’s robes, will be seen as inverted and reversed. The distortion varies depending on the distance of the objects from the orb. If Leonardo had accurately depicted the distortions, the palm touching the orb would have remained the way he painted it, but hovering inside the orb would be a reduced and inverted mirror image of Christ’s robes and arm.6

Fig. 84. Image through a crystal orb.



Why did Leonardo not do this? It is possible that he had not noticed or surmised how light is refracted in a solid sphere. But I find that hard to believe. He was, at the time, deep into his optics studies, and how light reflects and refracts was an obsession. Scores of notebook pages are filled with diagrams of light bouncing around at different angles. I suspect that he knew full well how an object seen through a crystal orb would appear distorted, but he chose not to paint it that way, either because he thought it would be a distraction (it would indeed have looked very weird), or because he was subtly trying to impart a miraculous quality to Christ and his orb.





