CHAPTER 28




* * *





The World and Its Waters



THE MICROCOSM AND THE MACROCOSM


During the period when he was probing the human body, Leonardo was also studying the body of the earth. True to form, he made analogies between the two. He was skillful at discerning how patterns resonate in nature, and the grandest and most encompassing of these analogies, in both his art and his science, was the comparison between the body of man and the body of the earth. “Man is the image of the world,” he wrote.1

Known as the microcosm-macrocosm relationship, it harkened back to the ancients. Leonardo first discussed this analogy in a notebook entry from the early 1490s:

The ancients called man a lesser world, and certainly the use of this name is well bestowed, because his body is an analog for the world. As man has in him bones that support his flesh, the world has its rocks that support the earth. As man has a pool of blood in which the lungs rise and fall in breathing, so the body of the earth has its ocean tide which likewise rises and falls every six hours, as if the world breathed. As the blood veins originate in that pool and spread all over the human body, so likewise the ocean sea fills the body of the earth with infinite springs of water.2

This echoed what Plato had written in the Timaeus, where he argued that just as the body is nourished by blood, so the earth draws water to replenish itself. Leonardo also drew on theorists of the Middle Ages, in particular a compendium by the thirteenth-century Italian monk and geologist Restoro d’Arezzo.

As a painter who marveled at nature’s patterns, Leonardo embraced the microcosm-macrocosm connection as more than merely an analogy. He viewed it as having a spiritual component, which he expressed in his drawing of Vitruvian Man. As we have seen, this mystical connection between humans and the earth is reflected in many of his masterpieces, from Ginevra de’ Benci to Saint Anne to Madonna of the Yarnwinder and eventually the Mona Lisa. It also became an organizing principle for his scientific inquiries. When he was immersed in his anatomical research on the human digestive system, he instructed himself, “First give the comparison with the water of the rivers; then with that of the bile which goes to the stomach against the course of the food.”3

Around 1508, while simultaneously pursuing his anatomy and earth studies in Milan, Leonardo returned to the analogy in a fascinating notebook, the Codex Leicester.I More focused than most of his other notebooks, it contains seventy-two pages jammed with long written passages and 360 drawings on geology, astronomy, and the dynamics of flowing water. His goal was the one that Renaissance thinkers, himself foremost among them, bequeathed to the subsequent ages of science and enlightenment: understanding the causes and effects that rule our cosmos, ranging from the mechanics of our muscles to the movement of the planets, from the flow in our arteries to that in the earth’s rivers.4 Among the questions it addresses: What causes springs of water to emerge from mountains? Why do valleys exist? What makes the moon shine? How did fossils get on mountains? What causes water and air to swirl in a vortex? And, most emblematically, why is the sky blue?

As he embarked on the Codex Leicester, Leonardo reached back to the microcosm-macrocosm analogy as his framework. “The body of the earth, like the bodies of animals, is interwoven with ramifications of veins, which are all joined together and are formed for the nutrition and vivification of this earth and of its creatures,” he wrote, echoing his words from almost two decades earlier.5 And on the following page he added, “Its flesh is the soil, its bones are the arrangements of the connections of the rocks of which the mountains are composed, its cartilage is the porous rock, its blood is the veins of waters; the lake of the blood, which is throughout the heart, is the ocean; its breathing and the increase and decrease of the blood through the pulses in the earth is thus: it is the flow and ebb of the sea.”6

The analogy helped him look at the earth in a pioneering way. Rather than assuming that it had been static since its creation, Leonardo realized that the earth had a dynamic history in which powerful forces caused it to change and mature over the centuries. “We might say that the earth has a vegetative soul,” he declared.7 By regarding the earth as a living organism, he was inspired to explore the way it aged and evolved: how mountains laced with fossils arose from the sea, how rocks became layers, how rivers cut valleys, and how rugged outcroppings eroded.8

But even though Leonardo embraced the microcosm-macrocosm analogy, he did not do so blindly. He tested it against experience and experiments, engaging in the great dialogue that shaped his understanding of the world. By the time he finished the Codex Leicester, he would discover that the comparison between the earth and the human body was not always useful. Instead, he came to fathom how nature had two traits that sometimes appeared to be in conflict: there was a unity to nature that resonated in its patterns and analogies, but there was also a wondrously infinite variety.





WATER


The primary focus of the Codex Leicester is the topic that Leonardo regarded as the most fundamental force in the life of the planet and in our bodies: the role and movements of fluids and, in particular, water. More than any other subject except the human body, hydrodynamics engaged his artistic and scientific and engineering interests, and he addressed it on various levels: detailed observations, practical inventions, grand projects, beautiful paintings, and cosmic analogies.9 One of his earliest drawings was of the landscape carved by the cascading Arno River. In Verrocchio’s Baptism of Christ, Leonardo painted flowing water as it passed over the feet of Jesus with a combination of beauty and sharply observed realism that had never been seen. In an early notebook, he drew an array of mechanical devices—including pumps, hydraulic tubes, water screws, and bucket wheels—designed to move water to different levels. In his job-seeking letter to Ludovico Sforza, he boasted of his abilities “to take the water out of the trenches” and “in guiding water from one place to another.” While in Milan, he studied that city’s large network of canals, including the grand canal dug in 1460 to Lake Como, as well as its well-tended waterways, dams, locks, fountains, and irrigation systems.10 He drilled holes in a barrel to study the trajectory and pressure of the water jets at differing heights.11 He devised grandiose schemes and practical devices for diverting the Arno River and draining swamps. And by using his knowledge of how water pouring from a pipe causes water eddies, he was able to envision the vortexes inside the human heart and how they would close a valve.

Leonardo’s studies of water began with practical and artistic purposes in mind, but as with his studies of anatomy and flight, he became enthralled by the beauty of the science. Water provided the perfect manifestation of Leonardo’s fascination with how shapes are transformed when in motion. How can something change its shape—a square becoming a circle, a torso narrowing as it twists—and keep the exact same area or volume? Water provides an answer. Leonardo learned early on that it cannot be compressed; a given quantity always has the exact same volume, whatever the shape of the river or container. So flowing water is constantly going through perfect geometric transformations. No wonder he loved it.

In the 1490s Leonardo began a treatise on hydraulics, which included notes on the speed of river currents at various depths, studies of whirlpools formed by the friction of the banks, and the turbulence caused when different currents collide. Not surprisingly, he never finished it, but in 1508 he tackled the topic again. In the Codex Leicester, he made an outline, as he often did, for the proposed tract. It was to have fifteen chapters, starting with “Of the Waters in Themselves,” followed by “Of the Sea” and “Of Underground Rivers,” and concluding with “Of Making Water to Rise” and “Of Things Consumed by the Waters.” One of the topics he planned to explore arose from his scheme to redirect the Arno River: “How with a few stones a river can be diverted, if one understands the line of its current.”12

His studies at times became such a deluge of details that they reveal more about his passion than about water’s dynamics. He spent hours fixated on flowing water, sometimes observing it and at other times manipulating it to test out his theories. In one part of the Codex Leicester he crammed 730 conclusions about water onto eight pages, causing Martin Kemp to comment, “We may feel that the boundary between dedication and obsession has been overstepped.”13 In another notebook, he made a list of different words that can be used to describe concepts involving the flow of water: “risaltazione, circolazione, revoluzione, ravvoltamento, raggiramento, sommergimento, surgimento, declinazione, elevazione, cavamento.” By the end, he had listed sixty-seven of them.14

He was able to avoid pedantry by regularly bringing his theories down to earth, so to speak, and tying them to practical applications. As he instructed himself in a typical notebook jotting, “When you put together the science of the motions of water, remember to include under each proposition its application, in order that this science may not be useless.”15

As usual, he combined experience and experiment; in fact he used the same word, esperienza, for both. While in Florence, he devised a pair of goggles for his dives in the Arno so he could study the water as it flowed past a weir. He threw oak apples or corks into a river and counted “beats of time” to study how long it took those in the center and those nearer the banks to move two hundred feet. He made floats that could hover at different depths to see how the currents changed from the surface to the bottom, and he crafted instruments that could measure a river’s downhill course so he could determine the “rate of fall of a river per mile.”

He also devised studio experiments so that he could test in a controlled environment the concepts he had observed in nature. These included making vessels of varying shapes and sizes so that he could see how water reacted when he disturbed it. He was especially interested in re-creating the eddies that he found it nature, so he built himself a glass tank, which he also used to test his theories of erosion. Make this experiment “in a square glass vessel like a box,” he wrote, “and you will see the revolution of this water.”16

To observe the movements of water, he used millet seeds, leaves, wooden rods, dyes, and colored inks.17 “Drop a few grains of panic-grass because the movement of these grains can quickly let you know the movement of the water that carries them. From this experiment you will be able to proceed to investigate many beautiful movements which result from one element penetrating into another.”18 Pause for a moment on that word beautiful. You have to love Leonardo for realizing that there is beauty in the way different water currents mingle. In another example, he instructed, “Let the water that strikes there have millet or fragments of papyrus mixed in it, so that you can better see its course.” In each case, he varied the conditions, such as using a gravel bed, then a bed of sand, then a smooth bed.

Some of the tests he proposed were merely thought experiments, to be conducted in his imagination or on paper. In one of his friction studies, for example, he wrote of doing an experiment “to increase or decrease in my imagination and to find out what is willed by the laws of nature.” He did the same type of thought experiments regarding the world and its water. What would happen to nearby underground streams, he asked, if the air were sucked out of a cave?

The primary tool he used, however, was simple observation, though his acute visual focus meant that he saw things the rest of us would miss. When we watch water flowing into a glass or coursing by in a river, we tend not to marvel the way he did at the many types of swirls and movements it makes. But he saw that “running water has within itself an infinite number of movements.”19

An “infinite number”? For Leonardo, that was not just a figure of speech. When he spoke of the infinite variety in nature, and especially of phenomena such as flowing water, he was making a distinction based on his preference for analog over digital systems. In an analog system, there are infinite gradations. That applies to most of the things that fascinated him: sfumato shadows, colors, movement, waves, the passage of time, the flow of fluids. That is why he believed that geometry was better than arithmetic at describing nature, and even though calculus had not yet been invented, he seemed to sense the need for such a mathematics of continuous quantities.





DIVERSIONS, EDDIES, WHIRLPOOLS, AND VORTEXES


From his care at depicting how the River Jordan would ripple past the ankles of Christ to his schemes for changing the course of the Arno, Leonardo had a keen interest in what happens when a flow of water is obstructed. The dynamics of water, he realized, are connected to the two proto-Newtonian ideas about motion that he embraced: impetus and percussion.

Impetus, a concept developed in the Middle Ages and adopted by Leonardo, describes how a body set in motion tends to keep moving in the same direction. It is a rudimentary precursor to the concepts of inertia, momentum, and Newton’s first law. Percussion involves what happens when a body in motion hits another object; it will be reflected or deflected at an angle and with a force that can be calculated. Leonardo’s understanding of fluid dynamics was also informed by his studies of transformations; when water is deflected, it changes path and shape, but it always remains the exact same volume.

In the margins of one crammed page of the Codex Leicester, Leonardo drew fourteen exquisite examples of what different obstacles do to the flow of water.20 Combining the pictures with text, he explored ways that a diversion could influence the erosion of riverbanks and how obstacles affect river flows below the surface. His studies informed his artistic renderings of water flow as well as his engineering aspirations to alter the course of rivers. But as he became more immersed, he began indulging his curiosity about water flow for its own sake.

A display of this can be seen on a stunning page, now at Windsor Castle, that starts with ink and red-chalk drawings of diversions of rivers and then proceeds to a sketch of water falling into a pond (fig. 115). This combination of scientific curiosity and artistic virtuosity begins with drawings of boards placed on an angle to obstruct the flow of a current, one of many such drawings he made after he studied ways to divert the Arno. The interlacing curves of the water as it rushes past the obstacles are drawn with the gusto Leonardo displayed whenever he drew spirals and curls. The currents look like pennants twisting together at a windy pageant, or the mane of a galloping horse, or the angelic curls of hair Leonardo loved to draw in his paintings of women and sketches of Salai.

Fig. 115. Water passing obstacles and falling into a pool.



As usual, he made an analogy, comparing the forces that create water eddies to those that create a hair curl: “The curling motion of the surface of water resembles the behavior of hair, which has two motions, one of which depends on the weight of the strands, the other on the direction of its revolving; thus water makes eddies, one part of which is due to the impetus of the principal current, and the other is due to the incidental motion and return flow.”21 This brief notation captures the essence of what motivated Leonardo: a joy in seeing the patterns that connect two things that delighted him, in this case ringlets of hair and eddies of water.

After drawing the two obstacles in a river, Leonardo drew a stream of water gushing out of an opening and forming complex patterns as it falls into a pond. These patterns resemble not only his renderings of human curls but also many of his drawings of plants, such as his beautiful rendering of a Star of Bethlehem (fig. 116).22 His depiction of water falling into a pond does not merely try to capture a moment; like his greatest paintings, it conveys movement.

As always, Leonardo observed details that most of us overlook. He drew and described the effect of the column of water hitting the surface, the waves that emanate from the impact, the percussions of the water in the pool, the movement of the air bubbles that are submerged by the falling water, and the way the bubbles pop into floral-like rosettes when they reach the surface. He noticed that eddies containing bubbles are short-lived because they dissipate as the bubbles rise, but he drew the eddies that have no bubbles with longer lines. “The eddies that begin on the surface are filled with air,” he saw. “Those that have their origin within the water are filled with water and these are more lasting because water within water has no weight.”23 Try noticing all that when you next fill a sink.

Leonardo was especially interested in eddies that form when flowing water is deflected from its path. As his drawings show, the water flowing past an obstacle curves toward the area directly behind the obstacle, where there is less water, forming a vortex. To this he applied his understanding of impetus and percussion; the water would attempt to continue moving in the same direction, but it would do so in a curved and spiraling manner because of the percussive force of hitting the obstacle.24

Fig. 116. Star of Bethlehem flower.



He realized that vortexes likewise occur in air when it blows past an object or when a beating wing causes an area of low air pressure. Like curls of hair, these swirls of water or air form geometric patterns—a spiral—that follow mathematical laws. It is another example of willfully noticing something in nature, discovering its pattern, and applying it to other aspects of nature. The result was so powerful and beautiful that spiraling vortexes would become an obsession, one that would reach its ultimate expression in a final set of drawings he did near the end of his life.

Leonardo’s studies of water movements also led him to understand the concept of waves. He realized that waves do not actually involve water moving forward. Waves in the sea and ripples emanating from a pebble falling into a pond progress in a certain direction, but these “tremors,” as he called them, merely cause the water to move up for a moment before returning to where it had been. He compared them to waves caused by a breeze in a field of grain. By the time he wrote the Codex Leicester and other, concurrent notebook pages on the movement of water, Leonardo had a deep feel for how waves propagate in a medium, and he correctly assumed that sound and light travel in waves. With his gift for analogy and ability to notice movement, he even viewed emotions as traveling in waves. At the core of the narrative in The Last Supper are the waves of emotion that emanate from the disturbance caused by the utterance of Jesus.





REVISING THE ANALOGY


One mark of a great mind is the willingness to change it. We can see that in Leonardo. As he wrestled with his earth and water studies during the early 1500s, he ran into evidence that caused him to revise his belief in the microcosm-macrocosm analogy. It was Leonardo at his best, and we have the great fortune of being able to watch that evolution as he wrote the Codex Leicester. There he engaged in a dialogue between theories and experience, and when they conflicted he was receptive to trying a new theory. That willingness to surrender preconceptions was key to his creativity.

The evolution of Leonardo’s thinking about the microcosm-macrocosm analogy began with his curiosity about why water, which should in theory tend to settle on the earth’s surface, emerges from springs and flows into rivers at the top of mountains. The veins of the earth, he wrote, carry “the blood that keeps the mountains alive.”25 He noticed a similar pattern involving plants as well as humans. Just as the blood in the human body goes up to the head and can flow out from cuts and nosebleeds, the sap of plants rises to the top leaves and branches. This pattern is found in both the microcosm and the macrocosm. “The waters circulate with continuous motion from the lowest depths of the seas to the highest summits of the mountains, not obeying the nature of heavy things,” he wrote. “And in this case they act like the blood in animals; which always moves from the sea of the heart and flows to the summit of their heads; and if a vein breaks here, as one sees a vein ruptured in the nose, all of the blood rises from below to the height of the broken vein.”26

Assuming that similar effects have similar causes, he began his quest to figure out what force impels liquids to move upward to become mountain springs. “The same cause which moves the fluids in all kinds of living bodies against the natural course of gravity also propels the water through the veins of the Earth,” he surmised. “As the blood rises from below and pours out through the broken veins of the forehead, and as the water rises from the lower part of the vine to the branches that are cut, so from the lowest depth of the sea the water rises to the summits of the mountains where, finding the veins broken, it pours down.”27

What was the force that did this? Over the years Leonardo considered several explanations. He initially thought the heat of the sun causes the water to rise inside the mountains, either as vapor that is then condensed or through some other method. “Where there is heat there is movement of vapor,” he noted, then made this analogy:

Just as the natural heat of the blood in the veins keeps it in the head of man—for when the man is dead the cold blood sinks to the lower parts—when the sun is hot on the head of a man the blood increases and rises so much that by pressuring the veins often causes headaches; in the same way that veins ramify through the body of the earth, and by the natural heat which is distributed throughout the containing body, the water is raised through the veins to the tops of mountains.28

He also considered whether the water may be sucked up, as in a siphon. His interest in water management and swamp drainage had led him over the years to experiment with different kinds of siphons and distillation equipment. On one large sheet of the Codex Leicester folded into folios (fig. 117), each possibility is sketched out in drawings and explained in words.29 He used drawings as tools to help him think. For example, on this page he made twelve pen-and-ink sketches of siphons to imagine how they could be connected to lift water to the top of mountains, but none of his configurations worked. It cannot be done, he concluded.

Fig. 117. Thought experiment using siphons.



Leonardo proceeded to dismiss all of the explanations for why the earth’s water circulates to the top of mountains, including theories he had once accepted. Most notably, he cast away his long-standing belief that heat draws water up inside mountains just like (he thought) it draws blood up to the human head, because he realized that mountain streams are just as prevalent in cold climes and months as they are in warm. “If you said that the heat of the sun draws it up high from the caverns of the mountains as far as the summit of the mountains, thereby drawing it up from the uncovered lakes and seas in the form of vapor for the composition of clouds,” he wrote in the Codex Leicester, “then there would be greater and more abundant veins of waters where the heat is greater than in colder countries, but we see the contrary.” He also noted that the veins of humans narrow with age, but the springs and rivers of the earth continually enlarge their channels.30

In other words, experience and experiment taught him that the received wisdom from the analogy between the macrocosm of the earth and the microcosm of man was flawed. The analogy had misled him about geology. So, like a good scientist, he revised his thinking. “The ocean does not penetrate under the earth,” he wrote in one of his other notebooks, “and cannot penetrate from the roots to the summits of mountains.”31

Only after pitting various theories against experience did Leonardo eventually get to the correct answer: the existence of springs and mountain rivers, indeed the entire circulation of water on the earth, results from the evaporation of surface water, the formation of clouds, and the subsequent rains. On one of his anatomical drawings from around 1510, written at the same time as he was revising his geological thoughts in his Codex Leicester, Leonardo jotted down a note “on the nature of veins” that declared, “The origin of the sea is contrary to the origin of the blood . . . [because] all the rivers are caused solely by the water vapors raised up into the air.” The amount of water on the earth is constant, he concluded, and it is “constantly circulating and returning.”32

Leonardo’s willingness to question and then abandon the enticing analogy between the circulation of water on the earth and the circulation of blood in the human body shows his curiosity and ability to be open-minded. Throughout his life, he was brilliant at discerning patterns and abstracting from them a framework that could be applied across disciplines. His geology studies show an even greater talent: not letting these patterns blind him. He came to appreciate not only nature’s similarities but also its infinite variety. Yet even as he abandoned the simplistic version of the microcosm-macrocosm analogy, he retained the aesthetic and spiritual concept underlying it: the harmonies of the cosmos are reflected in the beauty of living creatures.





FLOODS AND FOSSILS


Leonardo’s experience as an engineer and enthusiast of flowing water helped him understand erosion, which he realized is caused when water currents carve away dirt from riverbanks. He applied that knowledge to determining how valleys are created: “Rivulets will originate in the lowest parts of a surface, and these will begin to hollow out and form receptacles for other surrounding waters. In this way, every part of their course will become wider and deeper.”33 The rivers thus eventually wear away the earth and create valleys.

Part of his evidence came from sharp observations. The rock strata on one side of a valley, he noticed, has the same sequence of sedimentation as that on the other side. “One sees the strata on one side of the river corresponding with those on the other,” he wrote in the Codex Leicester. “With this argument, Leonardo was two hundred years ahead of his time,” the science historian Fritjof Capra asserted. “The superposition of rock strata would not be recognized and studied in similar detail until the second half of the seventeenth century.”34

These observations led Leonardo to consider how fossils—especially those of sea animals—ended up in these high stratified layers of rock. “Why are the bones of great fishes and oysters and corals and other various shells and sea-snails found on the tops of mountains?” he asked. Writing more than 3,500 words on the topic in the Codex Leicester, he described his detailed observations of fossils and argued that the biblical story of the Flood was incorrect. Showing no fear of combining heresy with blasphemy, he wrote “of the foolishness and simple-mindedness of those who require that these animals should be carried by the Deluge to these places, far from the sea.”35

Because fossils appear in several sediment layers that were deposited at different times, he argued, their location cannot be explained by a single flood. He also provided evidence from his close studies that the fossils did not come from a great swelling of the seas. “If the Deluge had carried the shells three hundred and four hundred miles far from the sea, it would have carried them there mixed up with different species, amassed together. But we see, at such distances, the oysters, and the shells, and the squids and all the other shells which stay congregated together.”36

His conclusion, which is correct, was that there had been enormous shifts and fluctuations in the crust of the earth that had given rise to mountains. “From time to time the bottom of the sea was raised, depositing these shells in layers,” he declared. He had seen it for himself as he hiked on Collegonzi Road near the Arno River south of Vinci, where the river had eroded the mountains and layers of shells were plainly visible in the bluish clay.37 As he later noted, “The ancient bottoms of the sea have become mountain ridges.”38

Among the evidence he cited was his discovery of what are now called “trace fossils.” These are formed not by the remains of animals but by the tracks and traces that animals left in the sediment when they were still alive. “In rock layers are still found the tracks of the earthworms, which proceeded through them when they were not yet dried out,” he wrote in the Codex Leicester.39 That proved, Leonardo said, that the sea animals had not been washed up by a deluge to the mountain but instead had been alive, at what was then the bottom of the sea, when the strata were formed. Leonardo thus became a pioneer of ichnology, the study of fossil traces, a field that did not come into full existence for another three hundred years.

When he examined the fossils of shellfish, he noticed a pattern that would help determine how long they had lived: “We can count in the crusts of cockles and snails the years and months of their life, as we do in the horns of oxen and sheep, and in the branches of trees.”40 It was a leap that was far ahead of its time. “That he was able to associate the annual rings in the branches of trees with the growth rings in the horns of sheep is remarkable enough,” Capra wrote. “To use the same analysis to infer the lifespan of a fossilized shell is extraordinary.”41





ASTRONOMY


Il sole nó si muóve. The sun does not move.

These words of Leonardo are written in unusually large letters on the top left of one of his notebook pages that is filled with geometric sketches, mathematical transformations, a cross section of the brain, a drawing of the male urinary tract, and doodles of his old warrior.42 Is this statement a brilliant leap decades ahead of Copernicus, Galileo, and the realization that the sun does not revolve around the earth? Or is it merely a random thought, perhaps a note for a pageant or play?

Leonardo leaves us in the dark, providing no elaboration. But when he wrote the sentence, around 1510, his geological studies had led him to pursue questions about the earth’s place in the cosmos and other wonders of astronomy. He does not seem to have discovered that the movements of the sun and stars are caused by the earth’s rotation (a young Copernicus was just formulating this theory at the time),43 but he did come to the realization that the earth is only one of many cosmic bodies, and not necessarily the central one. “The earth is not in the center of the sun’s orbit nor at the center of the universe, but in the center of its companion elements, and united with them,”44 he wrote. And he understood that gravity kept the seas from falling off the earth. “Let the earth turn on whichever side it may, the surface of the waters will never move from its spherical form, but will always remain equidistant from the center of the globe.”45

More impressive was his realization that the moon does not emit light but reflects the light of the sun, and that a person standing on the moon would see that the earth reflects light in the same way. “Anyone standing on the moon would see our earth just as we see the moon, and the earth would light it, just as the moon lights us.” That earthshine is what gives a new moon its faint glow, he realized. Drawing on the fastidious attention he paid to reflected secondhand light in the shadowed parts of his paintings, he wrote that when we can dimly see the dark part of the moon, it is because the parts not lit by the sun can catch the reflected light from the earth. He erred, however, in applying this theory to stars, which he also thought emitted no light of their own but instead merely reflected light from the sun. “The sun gives light to all celestial bodies,” he wrote.46

As with so many topics, he said that he was planning to write a treatise on astronomy, but he never did so. “In my book, I propose to show how the oceans and seas must, by means of the sun, make our world shine with the appearance of a moon, and to the remoter worlds it looks like a star.”47 It would have been an ambitious project. In a memo to himself he wrote, “I have first to demonstrate the distance of the sun from the earth, then to find its true size with one of its rays passed through a small hole into a dark place, and besides this, to find the size of the earth.”48





BLUE SKY


In pursuing his studies on the perspective of color and later on geology and astronomy, Leonardo pondered a question that seems so ordinary and mundane that most of us forget to marvel about it after age eight or so. But the greatest geniuses, from Aristotle to Leonardo, Newton, Rayleigh, and Einstein, have studied it: Why is the sky blue?

Leonardo worked on many explanations but finally settled on one, basically correct, that he recorded amid the geology and astronomy notes in his Codex Leicester: “I say that the azure in which the air shows itself is not its own color, but it is caused by warm humidity, evaporated in very minute and insensible atoms, which catches behind itself the percussion of the solar rays and makes itself luminous under the vast shades.” Or, as he put it more succinctly, “The air takes the azure through the corpuscles of humidity, which catch the luminous rays of the sun.”49

A similar theory had been handed down from Aristotle, but Leonardo refined it based on personal observations. After climbing to the top of Monte Rosa in the Italian Alps, he noticed how much bluer the sky looked. “If you go to the top of a high mountain the sky will look proportionately darker above you as the atmosphere becomes rarer between you and the outer darkness; and this will be more visible at each degree of increasing height till at last we should find darkness.”

He also conducted experiments to test this explanation. First, he re-created the blue by painting a misty white wash over a dark background. “Anyone who wants to see the ultimate proofs, let him tint a board with various colors, among which a most beautiful black should be included, and over all let a thin and transparent white lead be applied; then it will be seen that the brightness of this white lead will nowhere show itself as a more beautiful azure than over the black.”50 Another experiment involved smoke. “Let smoke be made out of a small quantity of dry wood, and let the solar rays percuss this smoke; and behind this smoke place a piece of black velvet, which is not exposed to the sun, and you will see that all the smoke between the eye and the darkness of the velvet shows itself to be of a very fine blue color.”51 He reproduced the phenomenon with “water violently ejected in a fine spray and in a dark chamber.” Showing his diligence as an experimenter, he used regular water filled with impurities and then water that had been purified. He discovered that the process “makes the sunbeam blue, and particularly if it is distilled water.”52

Leonardo found himself stymied by a related question: What causes a rainbow? That would have to wait for Newton, who showed how white light can be scattered by a water mist into its component colors based on wavelengths. Nor did Leonardo figure out that light of shorter wavelengths, at the blue end of the spectrum, scatters more than light of longer wavelengths; that would have to wait for Lord Rayleigh in the late nineteenth century and then for Einstein to calculate the exact formula for the scattering.



* * *




I. It was named after the Earl of Leicester, who purchased it in 1717. In 1980 it was purchased by the industrialist Armand Hammer, who renamed it the Codex Hammer. When Bill Gates bought it in 1994, his ego was not that intrusive, and he let the name revert to the Codex Leicester.





