CHAPTER 26




* * *





Return to Milan



THE DEATH OF SER PIERO


In the midst of Leonardo’s struggle to paint the Battle of Anghiari, his father died.

Their relationship had been complex. Piero da Vinci never legitimated Leonardo, but perhaps that was an act of intentional or unintentional kindness as well as coldness. Had he done so, Leonardo may have been expected to become a notary, despite guild rules that made that difficult, and Piero knew that vocation would not suit him. He helped his son get at least three major painting commissions, but he also drew up stringent contracts designed to force him to deliver. When Leonardo failed to do so, it likely caused strain between them.

After not marrying Leonardo’s mother, Piero had four wives. The last two were much younger than Leonardo, and with them Piero had nine sons and two daughters, many of them sired when he was in his seventies. Leonardo’s half-siblings were all young enough to be his children, and they didn’t regard him as a potential family heir.

The difficult family dynamics became evident when Piero died. Leonardo, imperfectly displaying his notarial heritage, recorded the event in his notebook. He seemed agitated. On a page filled with lists of his expenditures in July 1504, including “one florin to Salai to spend on the house,” he wrote the following: “On Wednesday at seven o’clock died Ser Piero da Vinci on the 9th of July 1504.”1 There was one little oddity: July 9 that year was a Tuesday.

Then Leonardo did something even more unusual. On the top right of another page, which contains some typical geometric drawings and a few columns of added numbers, he had the information repeated in a sloping script written in the conventional left-to-right manner. If you look at the manuscript carefully, you see that the note is in a different ink from the rest of the page; the fact that it is carefully scribed in a normal direction indicates that it may have been dictated to one of his assistants. It begins, “Wednesday at 7 o’clock.” The next word would likely have been “died,” but the line breaks off and is crossed out. On the next line the text begins anew: “On the 9th of July 1504 Wednesday at seven o’clock died Ser Piero da Vinci notary at the Palazzo del Popolo, my father, at seven o’clock, being eighty years old, leaving behind ten sons and two daughters.” Again there is something wrong with the day, and this time he has stated the hour twice. He also got his father’s age wrong by two years; Piero was only seventy-eight.2

In saying that Piero had ten sons, Leonardo was counting himself. Nevertheless, his father did not bequeath him any inheritance. Despite his advanced age and the fact that he was a notary, Piero had not made a will. Although he may not have made an active decision to disinherit Leonardo, he knew that dying intestate meant his property would be divided among only his legitimate sons. Perhaps he felt that leaving money to Leonardo wasn’t necessary because he was already successful, though in fact he was never comfortably wealthy. Or maybe Piero thought an inheritance would make his son even more negligent about completing commissions. More likely is that Leonardo was not legally an heir and, with their relationship strained, Piero felt no reason to change that. He had brought Leonardo into this world as an illegitimo, had not legitimated him as a child, and on his death delegitimized him yet again.3





LEAVING FLORENCE


The first time he moved away from Florence to Milan, in 1482, Leonardo left the Adoration of the Magi as merely a cartoon. When he decided to move the second time, in 1506, he left with the Battle of Anghiari similarly promising but unpainted. He would end up making Milan his home base for seven years, with only temporary visits back to Florence.

His excuse for going to Milan this time was to resolve the dispute over the second version of Virgin of the Rocks. He and his partner on the work, Ambrogio de Predis, had not been paid, and they had taken the matter to court. An arbitrator in April 1506 ruled against them, saying that the painting was imperfetto, a word connoting “unfinished” as well as “imperfect.” Specifically, the judgment was that there was not enough of Leonardo’s hand in it, so he was required to come add his own finishing touches before payment would be made.

If he had wished, Leonardo could have deflected the demand that he return to Milan by forfeiting any more payments for the Virgin of the Rocks. Money had never dictated his actions, plus he would have earned just as much if he stayed in Florence and finished the Battle of Anghiari. He heeded the summons to Milan because he wanted to go there. He had no desire to continue to struggle with his battle scene, compete with a younger artist who painted like a sculptor, or live in a town with his half-siblings.

The Florentine authorities reluctantly let him leave at the end of May 1506 partly for diplomatic reasons. Florence had been protected from Borgia and then other potential invaders by the French king, Louis XII, who then controlled Milan and admired The Last Supper and its artist. Louis expressed his desire to have Leonardo return to Milan, at least temporarily, and Florence’s leaders were afraid to refuse. However, they did want Leonardo’s stay to be temporary, so they required him to sign a notarized document pledging to return in three months. His bank manager had to cosign and commit to pay a penalty of 150 florins if he failed to do so. (The final payment for Virgin of the Rocks, when he did collect it, was only 35 florins.)

When Leonardo’s three months were almost up, it became clear that he would not be returning to Florence anytime soon. To stave off Florentine demands or a forfeiture of his florins, he had his French patrons launch a protracted and amusing barrage of diplomatic démarches. In August 1506 Charles d’Amboise, the French governor of Milan, sent two missives, one polite and the other more abrupt, saying that “in spite of all previous promises” Leonardo needed an extension of his leave from Florence because he had not finished all of the projects the king wanted. Florence’s leaders acquiesced with the understanding that he would come back at the end of September.

Unsurprisingly, that did not occur, and in early October Florence’s gonfaloniere Soderini lost patience. He sent a letter that attacked Leonardo’s honor and threatened Florence’s relations with Milan. “Leonardo has not behaved as he should have done towards the Republic, because he has taken a large sum of money and only made a small beginning on the great work he was commissioned to carry out,” he wrote. “We do not wish any further requests to be made on this matter, for this great work is for the benefit of all our citizens, and for us to release him from his obligations would be a failure of our duty.”4

But Leonardo stayed in Milan. Charles d’Amboise sent a flowery and polite rebuke to the Florentines, asserting, with some merit, that Leonardo was loved in Milan and, by implication, underappreciated in Florence, especially when it came to his engineering skills. “We were among those who loved him even before our eyes had rested upon him, and now, since we have known him and been much in his company, and have had personal experience of his various gifts, we truly see that his name, famous in painting, is relatively obscure so far as those other branches of knowledge in which he has reached so great a height.” Although he agreed that Leonardo would be free to return to Florence if he wanted, he added a reproach couched as a mischievous recommendation that the Florentines should treat their native son better: “If it be fitting to give a man of such talent a recommendation to his fellow citizens, we recommend him to you as strongly as we can and assure you that everything you can do to increase either his fortune and well-being, or those honors to which he is entitled, would give us, as well as him, the greatest pleasure, and we should be much obliged to you.”5

At that point King Louis, who had by then appointed Leonardo his “official painter and engineer” (nostre peintre et ingeneur ordinaire), intervened personally from the French court at Blois. Summoning Florence’s ambassador, he firmly requested that Leonardo stay in Milan until his own arrival there. “Your Signoria must render me a service,” he insisted. “He is an excellent master, and I desire to have several things from his hand, certain little Madonnas and other things, according to my fancy, and perhaps I shall ask him to do a portrait of me,” he told the ambassador. Florence’s leaders realized they had no choice but to please their military protector. The Signoria replied, “[Florence] cannot have any greater pleasure than to obey his wishes. . . . Not only the said Leonardo but all other citizens are at the service of his wishes and needs.”6

Leonardo was therefore still in Milan in May 1507, when Louis made a triumphant visit, having quelled a rebellion in Genoa on the way. The procession was led by three hundred armored soldiers and “a triumphal chariot bearing the cardinal Virtues and the god Mars holding in one hand an arrow [and] in the other a palm.”7

To celebrate the king’s arrival, there were days of festivals and pageants, and Leonardo was, of course, involved in choreographing them. A tournament was held in the plaza, and Isabella d’Este, her desire for a Leonardo portrait still unfulfilled, was at the masked ball.8 After Savonarola, the republic of Florence was restrained in its indulgence of such fetes, but Milan still relished them, which was another reason Leonardo loved Milan.





FRANCESCO MELZI


While in Milan in 1507, Leonardo met a fourteen-year-old named Francesco Melzi (fig. 101). He was the son of a distinguished nobleman who was a captain in the Milanese militia and later a civil engineer who worked to reinforce the city’s fortifications, endeavors that fascinated Leonardo. The Melzis lived in the largest villa in the town of Vaprio, on a river overlooking Milan, and Leonardo often stayed there, making it a second home.9

Fig. 101. Francesco Melzi by Boltraffio.



Leonardo was then fifty-five, and he had no son or heir. Young Francesco was an aspiring artist, pretty in the slightly soft way of Salai, and possessing some talent. With his father’s permission, he was effectively adopted by Leonardo, either through an informal agreement or a legal contract, one that would be honored in Leonardo’s will a decade later. Leonardo became a mix of legal guardian, godfather, adoptive father, teacher, and employer of the young Melzi. Although the decision may seem strange in our day, it was an opportunity for the Melzis to have their son become the pupil, heir, and amanuensis of a charming and beloved family intimate who also happened to be the most creative artist of the time. Afterward, Leonardo stayed close to the entire Melzi family, even helping to design improvements to the family’s villa.

For the rest of Leonardo’s life, Francesco Melzi would be by his side. He worked as Leonardo’s personal assistant and scribe, drafted his letters, kept his papers, and preserved them after his death. He wrote in a graceful italic, and his notations are to be found throughout Leonardo’s notebooks. He also was Leonardo’s art student. Though never a master painter, he was a good artist and draftsman who made some respectable drawings, including a famous one of Leonardo, and copied many of Leonardo’s works. With his talent, efficiency, and steady temperament, he was a devoted companion to Leonardo, and a less complicated and devilish one than Salai.

Years later, the biographer Vasari got to know Melzi and wrote that he “was a very beautiful boy [bellissimo fanciullo] and much loved by [molto amato da] Leonardo.” Those are similar to the words Vasari wrote of Salai, but it is unclear whether in this case there was any romantic or sexual relationship. I doubt there was. It is unlikely that Melzi’s father would have given him over to Leonardo for such an association, and we know that after Leonardo’s death Melzi married a prominent noblewoman and had eight children. Like much of Leonardo’s life, there is a cloak of mist over the truth about the full extent of their relationship.

What is clear is that their relationship was not only close but familial. Leonardo drafted a letter to him in early 1508 that displays both fondness and vulnerability:

Good day, Master [Messer, a salutation that respects his noble rank] Francesco,

Why in God’s name have you not answered a single one of all the letters I sent you? You just wait till I get there, and by God I’ll make you write so much you’ll be sorry.10

There follows another draft of a letter to Melzi that is slightly more reserved. It describes a question that needed to be resolved about the water rights the king had granted Leonardo as a payment, and notes, “I wrote to the superintendent and to you, and then I repeated it, and never had an answer. So you will have the goodness to answer me as to what happened.”

The letter mentioned that Leonardo was sending the messages by the hand of Salai, who was then twenty-seven. That raises the question of what Leonardo’s longtime companion thought of this new, younger, aristocratic, and far more polished member of the household. We know that both stayed by Leonardo’s side for the next decade of his life and that Melzi made a higher salary. There is a clue that Leonardo needed to work at keeping peace with Salai. It was around this time, in 1508, that the dictated note mentioned earlier appeared in one of his notebooks: “Salai, I want peace, not war. No more wars, I give in.”11

Whether or not Melzi was ever a lover, he became something more significant. Leonardo loved him as a son, and he needed a son to love. It helped that Melzi was appealing and pretty, which was no doubt one reason Leonardo liked to have him in his retinue. But he was also a loyal and caring companion to whom Leonardo could pass along his papers, his estate, his knowledge, and his wisdom. He could help mold him as he would have a son.

By 1508 that was all the more important to Leonardo. As he passed through his fifties, his notebooks show intimations of his awareness of his mortality. His father had died. His mother had died. He was estranged from his half-brothers. He had no family, other than Francesco Melzi.





FLORENCE INTERLUDE: AN INHERITANCE BATTLE


It was an inheritance dispute with his half-brothers rather than the exhortations of the Signoria or any desire to resume painting the Battle of Anghiari that brought Leonardo back to Florence temporarily in August 1507.

After he failed to inherit anything from his father, his beloved uncle Francesco da Vinci, a gentle and unambitious country squire who had been like a doting brother or surrogate father, decided to make up for it. With no children of his own, Uncle Francesco changed his will and, when he died in early 1507, left his estate to Leonardo. This apparently contradicted an understanding that his property would go to Piero’s legitimate children, and they sued Leonardo. The main issue was over a piece of farmland with two houses four miles east of Vinci.

For Leonardo, it was a matter of principle as well as property. He had lent his uncle money to improve the farmhouse, and he occasionally visited there to conduct experiments and make drawings of the surrounding landscape. The result was another of the angry draft letters to be found in his notebooks. It was addressed to his half-brothers but was written partly in the third person, perhaps because he had someone send it on his behalf. “You wished the utmost evil to Francesco,” he wrote. “You do not wish to repay his heir the money he lent for the property.” You have treated Leonardo “not as a brother but as a complete alien.”12

The king of France came to Leonardo’s aid, hoping to speed his return to Milan. He wrote to the Signoria of Florence, “We have been informed that our dear and much-beloved Leonardo da Vinci, official painter and engineer, has some dispute and litigation pending in Florence against his brothers over certain inheritances.” Emphasizing that it was important for Leonardo to be “in our entourage and in our presence,” the king urged the Florentines to “bring the said dispute and litigation to an end and see that true justice is done with as little delay as possible; and you will give us very agreeable pleasure by doing so.”13 The letter was countersigned and probably arranged and written by the king’s secretary Robertet, for whom Leonardo had painted Madonna of the Yarnwinder.

The king’s letter did not have much effect. By September, Leonardo’s inheritance case was still pending, so he tried pulling another string. He composed a letter, which was then scribed for him by Machiavelli’s secretary Agostino Vespucci, to Cardinal Ippolito d’Este, the brother of Isabella and Beatrice. The cardinal was a friend of the judge. “I entreat you, as urgently as I know how,” Leonardo pleaded, “to write a letter to Ser Raphaello [the judge] in that skillful and affectionate manner which you know so well, recommending to him Leonardo Vincio, Your Lordship’s most abject servant, requesting him and urging him not only to do me justice but to do so with propitious urgency.”14

Leonardo eventually won a partial victory based on a settlement he had proposed in his angry letter to his half-brothers: “Oh why don’t you let him [Leonardo] enjoy the property and its proceeds during his life, as long as they would return to your children?” That is probably what happened. Leonardo was given possession of the property and the money it made, but when he died he left it not to Melzi but to his half-brothers.15

The litigation settled, Leonardo was ready to return to Milan. He had not, during his eight months back in Florence, set brush to his unfinished Battle of Anghiari, nor did he have any desire to do so. He had not figured out how to make the painting work to his satisfaction, I think, and he was eager to abandon it and move back to a city more suited to his wide variety of interests.

But he was worried that he may have lost the favor of Milan’s French rulers. He had been away longer than expected, his requests to secure some water rights the king had given him had proven problematic, and some of his letters to Charles d’Amboise, the king’s governor in Milan, had gone unanswered. So he sent Salai to Milan to assess the situation and deliver another letter to Charles. “I suspect that my feeble recognition of the great benefits I have received from your Excellency may have made you annoyed with me, and for this reason you have not answered the many letters I have addressed to you,” he wrote. “I am now sending Salai to you to inform Your Excellency that I am almost at an end of my litigation with my brothers and I hope to be in Milan this Easter.” He would come bearing gifts. “I shall bring with me two pictures of the Madonna, different in size, intended for the Most Christian King or for anyone else that your lordship may choose.”

Then he turned somewhat plaintive. He had previously stayed in the palace of the governor, but now he wanted an apartment of his own. “I would like to know where I am to have my living quarters when I return, as I wish no longer to incommode your Excellency.” He also inquired whether his salary from the king would continue and if the governor could straighten out the matter of the water rights he had been granted. As he had done in his famous letter to Milan’s previous ruler when he first went there in 1482, Leonardo made a point of noting that he was not merely a painter. “I hope when I come to make machines and other things which will give great pleasure to our Most Christian King.”16

All worked out, and by the end of April 1508 Leonardo was back in Milan, with a home in a parish church; regular payments began arriving from the king, and a final payment for Virgin of the Rocks came in October. Both Salai and Melzi were with him, and all was again right with his world. Over the next decade, he would return to Florence only for brief personal visits, but he would never work there again. His heart and his home were once again in Milan.





MILAN’S DELIGHTFUL DIVERSIONS


To understand Leonardo, it is necessary to understand why he moved away from Florence, this time for good. One reason is simple: he liked Milan better. It had no Michelangelo, no cadre of half-brothers suing him, no ghost of his father hovering. It had royalty rather than republicans, with jubilant pageants rather than the after-stench of bonfires of the vanities. It had doting patrons rather than oversight committees. And the foremost patron there was the one who loved Leonardo the most, Charles d’Amboise, the French royal governor who had written a flowery letter reminding the Florentines how brilliant their native son was.

But there was more to Leonardo’s move than merely a preference for life in Milan. The first time he went there, he did so to recast himself as an engineer, scientist, and inventor. Now, more than twenty-five years later, he was fleeing not only Florence but also life as a public artist, a man defined mainly by his painting. As Isabella d’Este’s agent had reported, “He cannot bear the sight of a paintbrush.”

Florence was the artistic center of the Italian Renaissance, but Milan and its nearby university town of Pavia had become more intellectually diverse. Charles d’Amboise was dedicated to creating a court like that of the Sforzas, which included painters, entertainers, scientists, mathematicians, and engineers. Leonardo was the most valued jewel because he embodied all of those vocations.

During his sojourn back in Florence for his inheritance battle, he had focused mainly on scientific endeavors rather than painting commissions. He dissected the corpse of a man who claimed to be a hundred, planned a test of one of his flying machines, began a treatise on geology and water, devised a glass tank to examine the way flowing water deposits sediment, and swam underwater to compare the propulsion of a fish tail to a bird’s wing, jotting his conclusions on the same notebook page where he drafted his angry letter to his half-brothers. These interests, he believed, could be better pursued amid the intellectual ferment of Milan.

“Begun in Milan on the day of September 12, 1508,” he wrote on the opening page of a new notebook shortly after his return.17 It is filled with studies of geology, water, birds, optics, astronomy, and architecture. He also busied himself drawing a bird’s-eye schematic map of the city, suggesting the proper choir stalls to build in the Duomo, and devising military machinery that could be used against Venice.

In addition to its intellectual ferment, Milan had dazzling pageants and festivities that far surpassed those now to be found in republican Florence. When King Louis came for another visit, in July 1509, the procession included five chariots representing the towns recently conquered by France, followed by a triumphal chariot with three costumed allegorical figures, of the type Leonardo loved to design, representing Victory, Fame, and Happiness. To herald the king’s arrival, Leonardo built a mechanical lion. One observer wrote, “Leonardo da Vinci, the famous painter and our Florentine, devised the following intervention: he created a lion above the gate, which was lying down, and then got onto its feet when the King entered the city, and with its paw it opened up its chest and pulled out blue balls full of golden lilies, which he threw and scattered on the ground.” The lion, also described by Vasari, became a standard feature at future extravaganzas choreographed or inspired by Leonardo, including the entry of Francis I into Lyons in 1515 and into Argentan in 1517.18

Leonardo even had the joy of combining pageantry and architecture. For the palace of his patron Charles d’Amboise, he drew up plans for expanding a great hall so that it could better accommodate masquerades and performances. “The hall for the festival should be situated so that you come first into the presence of the lord, and then of the guests,” he wrote. “On the other side should be the entrance of the hall and a convenient staircase, which should be wide, so that the people in passing along them do not push against the masqueraders and damage their costumes.”19

In imagining a “garden of delights” for the estate, Leonardo indulged his love of water, proposing it as both an aesthetic feature and a method for cooling. “In the summer I shall make the water spring up fresh and bubbling and flow along in the space between the tables,” he wrote, drawing how the tables would be arranged. The water would power a mill, which would be used to force breezes. “By means of the mill I shall be able at any time to produce a current of air,” he promised, and “many water-conduits through the house, and springs in various places, and a certain passage where, when anyone passes, the water will leap up from all sides below, and so it will be there ready in case anyone should wish to give a shower-bath from below to the women or others who pass there.” The flowing water would power a large clock, copper mesh netting would cover the garden to make it an aviary, and “with the help of the mill I will make unending sounds from all sorts of instruments, which will sound for so long as the mill shall continue to move.”20

Neither the villa additions nor the garden of delights was ever built, which could reinforce the perception that the time Leonardo spent on engineering was to some extent wasted. Kenneth Clark was dismissive after rattling off a list of these nonpainterly passions: “One day he could be deciding on the form of the choir stalls in the Duomo; another, acting as military engineer in the war against Venice; another, arranging pageants for the entry of Louis XII into Milan.” Clark added sorrowfully, “It was a variety of employment which Leonardo enjoyed, but which has left posterity the poorer.”21

Perhaps Clark is right, in that our store of art does not include a Battle of Anghiari or other potential masterpieces. But if posterity is poorer because of the time Leonardo spent immersed in passions from pageantry to architecture, it is also true that his life was richer.





