CHAPTER 12




* * *





The Mechanical Arts



MACHINES


Leonardo’s interest in machinery was linked to his fascination with motion. He saw both machines and humans as apparatuses designed to move, with analogous components such as cords and sinews. As he did with his anatomy drawings of dissected bodies, he drew machines disassembled—using exploded and layered views—to show how motion is transferred from gears and levers to wheels and pulleys, and his cross-disciplinary interests allowed him to connect concepts from anatomy to engineering.

Other Renaissance technologists drew machines, but they did so by presenting them in completed form, without discussing the role and efficiency of each component. Leonardo, on the other hand, was interested in a part-by-part analysis of the transfer of motion. Rendering each of the moving parts—ratchets, springs, gears, levers, axles, and so on—was a method to help him understand their functions and engineering principles. He used drawing as a tool for thinking. He experimented on paper and evaluated concepts by visualizing them.

Take, for example, his drawing, beautifully shaded and in perfect perspective, of a hoist in which a lever can be rocked to ratchet up toothed wheels and lift a heavy load (fig. 52). It shows how an up-and-down cranking motion can be converted into a continuous rotary motion. The assembled mechanism is on the left side of the page, and to the right is an exploded view of each of the components.1

Fig. 52. A hoist with view of components.



Many of his most beautiful and meticulous drawings explore how to make sure that motion stays at a constant pace, without slowing down, when a coiled spring slowly unwinds. In the beginning, a tightly wound spring transmits a lot of power and causes a mechanism to move quickly, but after a while it has less power and the mechanism slows down. This can be a serious problem for many devices, especially clocks. A major enterprise of the late Renaissance was finding a way to equalize the power of an unwinding spring. Leonardo pioneered the depiction of gears that solve this challenge by using the spiral forms that fascinated him throughout his life. One particularly elegant drawing (fig. 53) shows a spiral gear equalizing the speed of an unwinding barrel spring and transmitting the constant power to a wheel that pushes a shaft steadily upward.2 The drawing is one of his most gorgeous works. He used his left-handed hatches to show form and shading, with curved hatchings for the barrel. His mechanical ingenuity is combined with his artistic passion for spirals and curls.

Fig. 53. A spiral gear for equalizing spring power.



The key purpose of machinery, then as now, is to harness energy and turn it into movements that accomplish useful tasks. For example, Leonardo showed how the energy of humans could be used to pump a treadmill or turn a crank; that power could then be transmitted by gears and pulleys to perform a function. To capture human energy most efficiently, he broke the human body into components; he illustrated how each muscle works, calculated its power, and showed methods for leveraging it. In a notebook from the 1490s, he calculated how much weight a man can lift with his biceps, legs, shoulders, and other muscle groups.3 “The greatest force a man can apply,” he wrote, “will be when he sets his feet on one end of the balance and then leans his shoulders against some stable support. This will raise, at the other end of the balance, a weight equal to his own plus as much weight as he can carry on his shoulders.”4

These studies were helpful for determining which muscles, if any, would be best at propelling a manned flying machine. But he also applied his findings to other tasks and sources of power. At one point he listed the many practical applications that could come from harnessing the power of the Arno River: “Saw mills, wool-cleaning machines, paper mills, hammers for forges, flour mills, knife grinding and sharpening, burnishing arms, manufacture of gunpowder, the silk spinning power of a hundred women, ribbon weaving, shaping vases made from jasper,” and more.5

One of the practical applications he explored was using machinery to drive piles in the banks of a river to regulate its flow. His initial concept was to use a drop hammer that was raised by pulleys and ropes. Later he came up with an idea for raising the hammer more efficiently by having men climb a ladder and descend in a stirrup.6 Likewise, when studying how to harness the power of falling water using a waterwheel, he realized correctly that it would be efficient to have the water fill buckets that would be pulled by gravity down one side of the wheel. He then designed a ratchet system so that the water would be dumped out of each bucket just as it got to the bottom of the turn. In a further modification, he designed a wheel with buckets in the shape of curved scoops.7

Leonardo also invented a machine designed to grind needles, which would have been a valuable contribution to the textile industries of Italy. It used human power to revolve a turntable attached to small grinding gears and polishing strips (fig. 54). He thought it might make him rich. “Tomorrow morning on January 2, 1496, I shall try out the broad belt,” he wrote in a notebook. He estimated that a hundred such machines could turn out forty thousand needles an hour, each of which could be sold for 5 soldi. With a labored set of calculations, and a tenfold error in multiplication, he figured that he could reap an annual revenue of 60,000 ducats, the gold equivalent of more than $8 million in 2017. Even allowing for his miscalculation, 6,000 ducats of revenue should have been enticing enough to lure him away from the trade of painting Madonnas and altarpieces. But needless to say, Leonardo never finished executing his plan. Coming up with the conception was enough for him.8

Fig. 54. Needle-grinding machine.





PERPETUAL MOTION


Leonardo understood the concept of what he called impetus, which is what happens when a force pushes an object and gives it momentum. “A body in motion desires to maintain its course in the line from which it started,” he wrote. “Every movement tends to maintain itself; or, rather, every body in motion continues to move so long as the influence of the force that set it in motion is maintained in it.”9 Leonardo’s insights were a precursor to what Newton, two hundred years later, would make his first law of motion: that a body in motion will stay in the same motion unless acted upon by another force.10

Fig. 55. A perpetual-motion machine using a water screw.



If you were able to eliminate all forces slowing down an object in motion, then it should be possible, Leonardo thought, for a body to stay in motion forever. So during the 1490s, he used twenty-eight pages of a notebook to explore the possibility of a perpetual-motion machine. He looked for ways to prevent the momentum of an object from draining away, and he studied ways that a system could create or replenish its own impetus. He considered many mechanisms: wheels with hammers on hinges that would swing out when their part of the wheel was heading down, ways to hang weights on wheels that would keep them turning, spiral screws that form a double helix, and curved compartments on a wheel with balls that roll to the lowest point when they are heading downward.11

He was especially intrigued by the possibility that water devices might be a way to achieve perpetual motion. One such attempt (fig. 55) envisions the use of moving water to turn a coiled tube known as an Archimedes screw, which would carry water upward and then continue turning the screw as it flows downward. Was it possible for the downward flow of water, he asked, to turn the screw with enough power to raise enough water to keep the process going indefinitely? Even though technologists would try ways of accomplishing that trick for the next three centuries, Leonardo concluded, clearly and correctly, that it was impossible. “Descending water will never raise from its resting place an amount of water equal to its weight.”12

His drawings served as visual thought experiments. By rendering the mechanisms in his notebooks rather than actually constructing them, he could envision how they would work and assess whether they would achieve perpetual motion. He eventually concluded, after looking at many different methods, that none of them would. In reasoning so, he showed that, as we go through life, there is a value in trying to do such tasks as designing a perpetual-motion machine: there are some problems that we will never be able to solve, and it’s useful to understand why. “Among the impossible delusions of man is the search for continuous motion, called by some perpetual wheel,” he wrote in the introduction to his Codex Madrid I. “Speculators on perpetual motion, how many vain chimeras you have created in this quest!”13





FRICTION


What prevents perpetual motion, Leonardo realized, is the inevitable loss of momentum in a system when it rubs against reality. Friction causes energy to be lost and prevents motion from being perpetual. So do air and water resistance, as he knew from his studies of bird flight and fish movement.

Thus he began a methodical study of friction, which resulted in some impressive insights. Through a set of experiments with heavy objects moving down a slope, he discovered the relationship among three determinants of friction: the weight of the object, the smoothness or roughness of the incline’s surface, and the steepness of the incline. He was among the first to figure out that the amount of friction is not dependent on the size of the area of contact between the object and the surface. “The friction made by the same weight will be of equal resistance at the beginning of its movement although the contact may be of different breadths and lengths,” he wrote. These laws of friction, and in particular the realization that friction is independent of the contact surface area, were an important discovery, but Leonardo never published them. They had to be rediscovered almost two hundred years later by the French scientific instrument maker Guillaume Amontons.14

Leonardo then went on to perform experiments to quantify the effects of each factor. To measure the power of an object sliding down an incline, he devised an instrument, now known as a tribometer, that would not be reinvented until the eighteenth century. Using the device, he analyzed what we now call the coefficient of friction, which is the ratio between the force it takes to move one surface over another and the pressure between the surfaces. For a piece of wood sliding against another piece of wood, he calculated this ratio as 0.25, which is about right.

He found that by lubricating the incline, he reduced friction, so he was among the first engineers to include points for the insertion of oil into his mechanical devices. He also devised ways to use ball bearings and roller bearings, techniques that were not commonly used until the late 1800s.15

In his Codex Madrid I, which is largely devoted to the design of more efficient machinery, Leonardo drew a new type of screw jack (fig. 56), one of those devices in which a big screw is turned to push upward on a heavy object. These were widely used in the fifteenth century. One drawback is that there is a lot of friction when a heavy load is pressing down. Leonardo’s solution, which was likely the first of its kind, was to put some ball bearings between the plate and the gear, which he drew in an exposed view just to the left of the jack. An even closer schematic view is to the left of that. “If a weight of a flat surface moves on a similar surface, its movement will be facilitated by interposing balls or rollers between them,” he wrote in the accompanying text. “If the balls or rollers touch each other in their motion, they will make the movement more difficult than if there were no contact between them, because when they touch the friction causes a contrary motion and the movements counteract each other. But if the balls or rollers are kept at a distance from each other . . . it will be easy to generate this movement.”16 Being Leonardo, he then produced many pages of sketched thought experiments in which he varied the size and arrangements of the ball bearings. Three balls are better than four, he determined, because three points define a plane, and thus the three balls will always touch a flat surface, whereas a fourth ball may be out of alignment.

Fig. 56. A screw jack with ball bearings.



Leonardo was also the first person to record the best mix of metals to produce an alloy that reduces friction. It should be “three parts of copper and seven of tin, melted together,” which was similar to the alloy he was using to make mirrors. “Leonardo’s formula gives a perfectly working anti-friction composition,” wrote Ladislao Reti, the historian of technology who played a role in discovering and publishing the Madrid Codices in 1965. Once again, Leonardo was about three centuries ahead of his time. The first antifriction alloy is usually credited to the American inventor Isaac Babbitt, who patented an alloy containing copper, tin, and antimony in 1839.17

Through his work on machinery, Leonardo developed a mechanistic view of the world foreshadowing that of Newton. All movements in the universe—of human limbs and of cogs in machines, of blood in our veins and of water in rivers—operate according to the same laws, he concluded. These laws are analogous; the motions in one realm can be compared to those in another realm, and patterns emerge. “Man is a machine, a bird is a machine, the whole universe is a machine,” wrote Marco Cianchi in an analysis of Leonardo’s devices.18 As Leonardo and others led Europe into a new scientific age, he ridiculed astrologers, alchemists, and others who believed in nonmechanistic explanations of cause and effect, and he relegated the idea of religious miracles to the purview of priests.





