CHAPTER 9




* * *





The Horse Monument



A RESIDENCE AT THE COURT


As he was consulting on the Milan Cathedral in the spring of 1489, Leonardo got the job he had requested at the end of his letter to Ludovico Sforza seven years earlier: designing the proposed monument “to the immortal glory and eternal honor of His Lordship, your father.” The plan was for a mammoth equestrian statue. “Prince Ludovico is planning to erect a worthy monument to his father,” Florence’s ambassador in Milan reported back to Lorenzo de’ Medici in July of that year. “In accordance with his orders, Leonardo has been asked to make a model in the form of a large horse ridden by Duke Francesco in full armor.”1

The commission, along with his service as an impresario and designer of court pageants, finally earned Leonardo an official appointment at court, with a salary and accommodations. He was described as “Leonardo da Vinci, engineer and painter,” and listed as one of the four primary ducal engineers. It was the situation he had yearned for.

The job came with rooms for himself and his assistants, plus a studio for making the model for the horse monument, at the Corte Vecchia, the old castle in the center of town next to the cathedral. Once the home of the Visconti dukes, it was a medieval castle, replete with towers and moats, which had recently been renovated. Ludovico preferred the newer, more strongly fortified palace on the west side of town, which became the Sforza Castle, and he used the old palace as a place to house favored courtiers and artists, such as Leonardo.

Leonardo’s stipend was generous enough to cover the costs of his retinue, including two assistants and three or four students, at least during those periods when he actually got paid. Ludovico, whose costs for defense were rising, was at times short of funds, and in the late 1490s Leonardo had to send him a plea for overdue payments to cover his costs and those of “the two skilled workmen who are continually in my pay and at my expense.”2 Ludovico eventually made good by giving Leonardo an income-producing vineyard just outside of Milan, which he kept for the rest of his life.

Leonardo’s quarters were on two floors facing the smaller of the two courtyards. In one of the larger upstairs rooms, leading out onto a roof, he built one of his attempts at a flying machine. We can imagine what his studio looked like, in reality or at least in Leonardo’s imagination, from a description he wrote of an artist at work: “The painter sits in front of his work at perfect ease. He is well dressed and wields a very light brush dipped in delicate color. He adorns himself with the clothes he fancies; his home is clean and filled with delightful pictures, and he is often accompanied by music or by the reading of various beautiful works.”

His engineering instincts led him to envision some ingenious conveniences: the windows of the studio should have adjustable blinds so the light could be easily controlled, and the painting easels should be on platforms that could be raised and lowered with pulleys, “so that it would be the painting, not the painter, that would move up and down.” He also devised and drew plans for a system to protect his works at night. “You would be able to put your work away and close it, like those chests that can be used as seats when they are closed.”3





DESIGNING THE MONUMENT


Since his power was not based on long dynastic heritage, Ludovico sought monumental ways to assert his family’s glory, and Leonardo’s design for an equestrian statue catered to that desire. It was intended to be a bronze horse and rider weighing seventy-five tons, which would have been the biggest one yet made. Verrocchio and Donatello had recently created large equestrian monuments that were twelve or so feet high; Leonardo planned to build one at least twenty-three feet high, three times larger than life.

Although the original purpose was to honor the late Duke Francesco by glorifying him atop a steed, Leonardo focused more on the horse than the rider. In fact, he seemed to lose all interest in the Duke Francesco component, and the monument soon was being referred to, by himself and others, as il cavallo (the horse). In preparation, he threw himself into a detailed anatomical study of horses that included making precise measurements and, later, dissections.

Even though it was typical of him, we still should marvel that he would decide that before sculpting a horse he had to dissect one. Once again his compulsion to engage in anatomical investigations for his art eventually led him to pursue the science for its own sake. We can see this process unfold as he worked on the horse: careful measurements and observations are recorded in his notes, which lead to scores of diagrams, charts, sketches, and beautiful drawings in which art and science are interwoven. This eventually leads him into comparative anatomy; in a later set of drawings of human anatomy, he renders the muscles, bones, and tendons of a man’s left leg next to those of a dissected back leg of a horse.4

Leonardo got so deeply immersed in these studies that he decided to begin an entire treatise on the anatomy of horses. Vasari claimed that it was actually completed, though that seems unlikely. As usual, Leonardo was easily distracted by related topics. While studying horses, he began plotting methods to make cleaner stables; over the years he would devise multiple systems for mangers with mechanisms to replenish feed bins through conduits from an attic and to remove manure using water sluices and inclined floors.5

When Leonardo was studying the horses in the royal stables, he became particularly interested in a Sicilian thoroughbred owned by Galeazzo Sanseverino, the Milanese commander who was married to Ludovico’s daughter. He drew it from a variety of angles, and in one detail of its foreleg included twenty-nine precisely diagrammed measurements, from the length of its hoof to the width of its calf in different places (fig. 45). Another drawing, this one using metalpoint and ink on blue prepared paper, is the equestrian version of the Vitruvian Man, aesthetically beautiful yet scientifically annotated. In the Royal Collection at Windsor alone, there are more than forty such pieces of his equine anatomical art.6

Fig. 45. Leg of horse.



At first Leonardo planned to have the horse rearing on its hind legs, with the left foreleg atop a trampled soldier. In one drawing, he shows the horse’s head turning and its muscled legs appearing to move as its tail flutters behind (fig. 46). But even Leonardo was practical enough to realize, eventually, that such a large monument so precariously balanced was not a good idea, so he settled for a horse that would be fancifully prancing.

Fig. 46 Study for the Sforza monument.



As was often the case, Leonardo’s mix of diligence and distraction, focus and delay, made his patrons nervous. The July 1489 report written by Florence’s ambassador to Milan mentioned a request from Ludovico that Lorenzo de’ Medici “kindly send him one or two Florentine artists who specialize in this kind of work.” Apparently Ludovico did not trust Leonardo to complete the task. “Although he has given the commission to Leonardo, it seems that he is not confident that he will succeed,” the ambassador explained.

Sensing that he might lose the commission, Leonardo launched a public relations campaign. He enlisted his friend the humanist poet Piattino Piatti to write an epigram for the base of the statue and a poem to celebrate his work on its design. Piatti was not a favorite of the Sforzas, but he had considerable influence with the humanist scholars who formed public opinion around the court. In August 1489, a month after Ludovico solicited suggestions from another sculptor, Piatti sent a letter to his uncle asking him to have “one of your servants deliver as soon as possible the enclosed tetrastich [four-line verse] to Leonardo the Florentine, an excellent sculptor, who requested it some time ago.” Piatti told his uncle that he was one of many participants in a public-support campaign: “This task is for me somewhat of an obligation because Leonardo is indeed a good friend of mine. I do not doubt that the same request was made by the same artist to many others, who are probably better qualified than myself to express the same thing.” Nevertheless, Piatti persevered in the task. In one poem he wrote of the grandeur of Leonardo’s proposed horse: “Art imitating the immortal actions / of the duke, made the horse under the duke a supernatural one.” Another of the poems portrayed “Leonardo da Vinci, a most noble sculptor and painter,” in humanist terms as an “admirer of the Ancients and their grateful disciple.”7

Leonardo was successful in hanging on to the commission. “On the 23rd of April 1490, I began this notebook and recommenced the horse,” he wrote at the beginning of a new journal.8

On his trip to Pavia with Francesco di Giorgio two months later, Leonardo studied one of the few remaining ancient Roman equestrian sculptures. He was struck by how a statue could convey the impression of motion. “The movement is more praiseworthy than anything else,” he wrote in his notebook. “The trot almost has the quality of a free horse.”9 He realized that a monument of a horse in a prancing high-stepping walk could be as lively as that of a rearing horse, and it would be far easier to execute. His new design was similar to the monument in Pavia.

Leonardo succeeded in creating a full-size clay model, which was put on display in November 1493 at the celebration for the marriage of Ludovico’s niece Bianca Sforza to the future Holy Roman emperor Maximilian I. The mammoth and glorious model occasioned effusions from the court poets. “Neither Greece nor Rome ever saw anything grander,” wrote Baldassare Taccone. “See how beautiful this horse is; Leonardo da Vinci alone has created it. Sculptor, fine painter, fine mathematician, so great an intellect rarely does Heaven bestow.”10 Many poets celebrating the colossal scale and beauty of the clay model played on Leonardo’s name to herald the Vincian victory over all previous designs, including those of the ancients. They also praised its vitality. Paolo Giovio described it as “vehemently aroused and snorting.” The model would, at least for a while, bring Leonardo renown not just as a painter but also as a sculptor and, he hoped, an engineer.11





CASTING


Even before he finished the clay model, Leonardo was working on the even greater challenge of casting such a huge monument. With precision and ingenuity, he spent more than two years sketching out plans. “Here a record shall be kept of everything related to the bronze horse, presently under execution,” he wrote at the beginning of a new notebook in May 1491.12

The traditional way to cast a large monument was in pieces. A separate mold would be made for the head, legs, and torso; the pieces would then be welded together and polished. The result was never perfect, but it was practical. Because Leonardo’s monument was so much larger than any ever done, this piecemeal method would seem to be all the more necessary.

Leonardo, however, was dedicated to achieving feats of engineering that would match in beauty and audacity the obsessive perfection he had pursued as an artist. So he decided to cast his huge horse all in one mold. On a captivating page in his notebook, he sketched out many of the mechanisms that would be necessary (fig. 47). His drawings are exuberant and yet detailed, as though a futurist were designing a launch pad for a rocket ship.13

Fig. 47. Plans for casting the monument.



Using the clay model he built, Leonardo planned to cast a mold and then coat its inside with a mix of clay and wax. “Dry it in layers,” he specified. He would fit the mold around a core made of clay and rubble; the molten bronze would be poured into holes of the mold and displace the wax mixture, then the rubble core would be removed from what would become the hollow inside of the statue. A “little door with hinges” atop the horse, which would eventually be covered by the rider, would serve as a panel through which he could extract the rubble of the core after the bronze had cooled.14

Leonardo then tailored a “casting hood,” a lattice iron frame that would be strapped around the outside of the mold like a corset to hold it together and keep it in shape. The hood was not just an ingenious engineering scheme but also a red-chalk piece of art of eerie beauty, with the horse’s head gently twisting and latticework elegantly shaded (fig. 48). Crossbars and struts would bolt together the casting hood to the inner core, providing firm support for the entire system. “These are the pieces of the form of the head and neck of the horse with their armatures and irons,” he wrote.

Fig. 48. Casting hood for the monument.



The plan was to pour the molten bronze into the mold through many holes so that it would be distributed evenly. Four furnaces would be arrayed around a pit so that the process could happen quickly and the metal could cool more uniformly. “For the casting, let every man keep his furnace closed with a red-hot iron bar and let the furnaces be opened simultaneously; and let fine iron rods be used to stop any of the holes from becoming blocked by a piece of metal; and let there be four rods kept in reserve at red heat to replace one of the others if they should be broken.”

Leonardo experimented with different materials and mixes to get the right components for the casting process. “First of all, test every ingredient and choose the best.” For example, he tried out ingredients for the clay-and-rubble mix that formed the inner core. “Try it first,” he wrote next to a recipe that included “a mixture of coarse river sand, ash, crushed brick, egg white, and vinegar together with your clay.” To keep the mold from being damaged by the damp when it was underground, he concocted many potential coatings. “Let the inside of all the molds be wetted with linseed oil or turpentine, and then take a handful of powdered borax and Greek pitch with distilled alcohol.”15

At first he considered digging a deep hole and placing the mold in it upside down, with the feet sticking up. The hot metal would be poured into the horse’s belly with the steam escaping through holes in the feet. The drawing (fig. 47) shows the hoists, levers, and machinery he planned to use. But by the end of 1493, he had abandoned this approach after realizing that the pit would be so deep that it would hit the water table. Instead, he decided that the mold should be laid sideways in the pit. “I have decided to cast the horse without the tail and on its side,” he wrote in December 1493.

Shortly thereafter the project ended. Defense expenditures took precedence over artistic ones. In 1494 the troops of the French king Charles VIII swept through Italy, and the bronze intended for the horse was sent by Ludovico to his brother-in-law Ercole d’Este in the town of Ferrara to make three small cannons. In a draft of a letter to Ludovico a few years later, Leonardo seemed dejected but resigned. “Of the horse I will say nothing,” he wrote, “for I know the times.”16

The cannons would end up doing little good, for the French would easily conquer Milan in 1499. And when they did, the French archers used Leonardo’s huge clay model for target practice, destroying it. Ercole d’Este, who made the cannons, may have felt bad, because two years later he instructed his agent in Milan to ask the French authorities for the unused mold: “Seeing that there exists in Milan the mold of a horse that Lord Ludovico intended to have cast, made by a certain Messer Leonardo, an excellent master of such things, we believe that if we were granted the use of the mold, it would be a good and desirable thing serving to make our own horse.”17 But his request was never met. Through no fault of his own, Leonardo’s horse joined other of his potential masterpieces in the realms of unfulfilled dreams.





