CHAPTER 17




* * *





The Science of Art



THE PARAGONE


On February 9, 1498, Leonardo starred in an evening of debates at the Sforza Castle that involved the relative merits of geometry, sculpture, music, painting, and poetry. He gave a rigorous scientific and aesthetic defense of painting, which was then considered a mechanical art, arguing that it should instead be regarded as the highest of the liberal arts, transcending poetry and music and sculpture. The court mathematician Luca Pacioli, who was there to argue for the primacy of geometry, wrote that the audience included cardinals, generals, courtiers, and “eminent orators, expert in the noble arts of medicine and astrology.” Most of Pacioli’s praise was lavished on Leonardo. “One of the most illustrious participants,” he wrote, was the “ingenious architect and engineer and inventor Leonardo, who with each accomplishment in sculpture, casting and painting proves true his name.” Not only was this a pun on his name (Vinci, the victor), but it also showed that Leonardo was viewed by others, and not just himself, as an engineer and architect as well as a painter.1

This type of staged debate on the comparative value of various intellectual endeavors, ranging from math to philosophy to art, was a staple of evenings at the Sforza Castle. Known as a paragone, from the Italian word for “comparison,” such a discourse was a way for artists and scholars to attract patrons and elevate their social status during the Italian Renaissance. This was another field in which Leonardo, with his love of both stagecraft and intellectual discussion, could excel as an ornament of the court.

The relative merit of painting in comparison to other forms of art and craft had been debated since the dawn of the Renaissance with a seriousness that transcended our current-day debates on such things as, say, the merit of television versus cinema. Cennino Cennini in his treatise The Book of Art wrote, in about 1400, about the skill and imagination required for painting and argued, “It justly deserves to be enthroned next to theory and crowned with poetry.”2 Alberti provided a similar panegyric on the primacy of painting in his 1435 treatise, On Painting. A counterargument was made in 1489 by Francesco Puteolano, who argued that poetry and historical writing were most important. The reputations and memories of the great rulers, including Caesar and Alexander the Great, came from historians rather than sculptors or painters, he said.3

Leonardo’s paragone, which he seems to have written and revised multiple times, occasionally rambles, but it is important to remember that this polemic, like many of his prophecies and parables, was designed to be performed rather than published. Scholars sometimes analyze the paragone as an essay rather than another example of the importance that the staging of theatrical events played in Leonardo’s life, art, and engineering. We should imagine him declaiming the words in front of an admiring ducal court audience.4

The goal of Leonardo’s argument was to elevate the work of painters—and their social status—by linking their art to the science of optics and the mathematics of perspective. By exalting the interplay between art and science, Leonardo wove an argument that was integral to understanding his genius: that true creativity involves the ability to combine observation with imagination, thereby blurring the border between reality and fantasy. A great painter depicts both, he said.

One premise for his argument was the supremacy of sight over the other senses. “The eye, which is said to be the window of the soul, is the principal means by which the brain’s sensory receptor may fully and magnificently contemplate the infinite works of nature.” The sense of hearing was less useful, because sounds disappear after they are made. “Hearing is less noble than sight; as soon as it is born it dies, and its death is as swift as its birth. This does not apply to the sense of sight, because if you represent to the eye a beautiful human body composed of proportionately beautiful parts, this beauty . . . has great permanence and remains to be seen.”5

As for poetry, it is less noble than painting, Leonardo argued, because it takes many words to convey what a single picture can:

If you, O poet, tell a story with your pen, the painter with his brush can tell it more easily, with simpler completeness, and less tedious to follow. Take a poet who describes the charms of a woman to her lover, and a painter who represents her, and you will see where nature leads the enamored critic. You have classed painting among the mechanical arts, but, truly, if painters were as apt at praising their own works in writing as you are, it would not lie under the stigma of so unhonored a name.6

He admitted, yet again, that he was a man “without letters,” and thus could not read all of the classic books, but as a painter he did something more glorious, which was to read nature.

Painting is also more elevated than sculpture, he argued. The painter has to depict “light, shade, and color,” which the sculptor can generally ignore. “Therefore sculpture has fewer considerations and consequently requires less ingenuity than painting.”7 In addition, sculpting is a messier endeavor, one not suitable for a gentleman of the court. The sculptor is “pasted and smeared all over with marble powder . . . his dwelling is dirty and filled with dust and chips of stone,” whereas the painter “sits before his work at the greatest of ease, well dressed and applying delicate colors with his light brush.”

Creative endeavors had been divided since antiquity into two categories: the mechanical arts and the more exalted liberal arts. Painting had been classified as mechanical because it was a craft based on handiwork, like that of goldsmiths and tapestry weavers. Leonardo refuted this by arguing that painting is not only an art but also a science. In order to convey three-dimensional objects on a flat surface, the painter needs to understand perspective and optics. These are sciences that are grounded in mathematics. Therefore, painting is a creation of the intellect as well as the hands.

Leonardo then went one step further. Painting requires not only intellect, he said, but also imagination. This element of fantasia makes painting creative, thus more exalted. It allows not only the depiction of reality but also the conjuring up of imaginative inventions, such as dragons, monsters, angels with wondrous wings, and landscapes that are more magical than any that exist in reality. “Thus it was wrong, O writers, to have omitted painting from the category of the liberal arts, since she embraces not only the works of nature but also infinite things that nature never created.”8





FANTASIA AND REALITY


That, in a nutshell, was Leonardo’s signature talent: the ability to convey, by marrying observation with imagination, “not only the works of nature but also infinite things that nature never created.”

Leonardo believed in basing knowledge on experience, but he also indulged his love of fantasy. He relished the wonders that can be seen by the eye but also those seen only by the imagination. As a result, his mind could dance magically, and sometimes frenetically, back and forth across the smudgy line that separates reality from fantasia.

Take, for example, his advice about looking at a wall that is “spotted with stains or has a mix of stones.” Leonardo could stare at such a wall and observe with precision the striations of each stone and other factual details. But he also knew how to use the wall as a springboard for his imagination and as a “way to stimulate and arouse the mind to various inventions.” He wrote in his advice for young artists:

You may discover in the patterns on the wall a resemblance to various landscapes, adorned with mountains, rivers, rocks, trees, plains, wide valleys and hills in varied arrangement; or again you may see battles and figures in action; or strange faces and costumes, and an endless variety of objects, which you could turn into complete and well-drawn forms. The effect produced by these mottled walls is like that of the sound of bells, in which you may recognize any name or word you choose to imagine. . . . It should not be hard for you to look at stains on walls, or the ashes of a fire, or the clouds, or mud, and if you consider them well you will find marvelous new ideas, because the mind is stimulated to new inventions by obscure things.9

Leonardo was one of history’s most disciplined observers of nature, but his observation skills colluded rather than conflicted with his imaginative skills. Like his love of art and science, his ability to both observe and imagine were interwoven to become the warp and woof of his genius. He had a combinatory creativity. Just as he could festoon a real lizard with various animal parts to turn it into a dragon-like monster, for either a parlor trick or a fanciful drawing, he was able to perceive the details and patterns of nature and then remix them in imaginative combinations.10

Not surprisingly, Leonardo tried to find a scientific explanation for this ability. When he mapped the human brain during his anatomy investigations, he located the talent for fantasia in a ventricle where it could interact closely with the capacity for rational thinking.





THE TREATISE


Leonardo’s paragone presentation was so impressive that, according to his early biographer Lomazzo, the Duke of Milan suggested he write it as a treatise. Leonardo set out to do so, and apparently some of the drafts in his notebook were pulled together in a coherent enough fashion that Lomazzo referred to it as a book.11 Likewise, Leonardo’s friend Pacioli reported in 1498, “Leonardo with all diligence has finished his praiseworthy book on Painting and Human Motion.” But as with many of his paintings and all of his treatises, Leonardo had a higher standard for using the word finished, and he never released his paragone nor any treatise on painting for publication. Pacioli was being overly kind when he ascribed to Leonardo the virtue of diligence.

Instead of publishing his notes on painting, Leonardo fiddled with them for the rest of his career, just as he did with many of his paintings. More than a decade later, he was still adding thoughts and making new outlines for a treatise. The result is a medley of notes in a variety of forms: entries he made in two notebooks during the early 1490s, known as Paris Manuscripts A and C; a set of ideas compiled around 1508, later repackaged in what is now called the Codex Atlanticus; and a lost compilation from the 1490s, Libro W. After Leonardo’s death, his assistant and heir, Francesco Melzi, drew on these notebook pages to produce in the 1540s what is known, in various versions and lengths, as Leonardo’s Treatise on Painting.12 In most editions of that work, Leonardo’s paragone was published as the opening section.

Most of the passages that Melzi collected were written by Leonardo between 1490 and 1492, around the time he was beginning the second (London) version of Virgin of the Rocks and had built up a studio that included young students and apprentices.13 It is therefore useful to read Leonardo’s words as if many of them had been intended to be studied in his workshop as he collaborated with his colleagues on that painting and tried to get the complex lighting challenges right.

In these writings, we can see how Leonardo treated art as a science. The title that Pacioli used for Leonardo’s proposed treatise, “On Painting and Human Motion,” indicates the connections his mind made. The topics he wove together include shadows, lighting, color, tone, perspective, optics, and the perception of movements. As with his study of anatomy, he began his work on these subjects to help perfect his painting techniques, but then proceeded to immerse himself in the complexities of science for the pure joy of understanding nature.





SHADOWS


Leonardo’s power of observation was especially acute when it came to discerning the effects of light and shade. He studied how different types of shadows were caused by varying types of light, and he deployed these as his primary modeling tool to give his painted objects an impression of volume. He noticed how light bouncing off an object could subtly enliven a nearby shadow or cast a glow on the underside of a face. He could see how the color of an object was affected by a shadow cast over it. And he engaged in the interplay between observation and theory that characterized his science.

He had first tackled the complexities of shadows when drawing draperies as an exercise in Verrocchio’s studio. He came to understand that the use of shadows, not lines, was the secret to modeling three-dimensional objects on a two-dimensional surface. The primary goal of a painter, Leonardo declared, “is to make a flat surface display a body as if modeled and separated from this plane.” This crowning achievement of painting “arises from light and shade.” He knew that the essence of good painting, and the key to making an object look three-dimensional, is getting the shadows right, and that’s why he spent more time studying and writing about shadows than he did on any other artistic topic.

He felt that shadows were so important to art that, in the outline for his treatise, he planned that the longest section would be on that topic. “Shadows appear to me to be of supreme importance in perspective, because, without them opaque and solid bodies will be ill defined,” he wrote. “Shadow is the means by which bodies display their form. The forms of bodies could not be understood in detail but for shadow.”14

This emphasis on the use of shadows as the key to modeling three-dimensional objects in a painting was a break from common practice of the time. Following Alberti, most artists emphasized the primacy of contour lines. “Which is the most important, the Shadows or Outlines in Painting?” Leonardo asked in his notes for his treatise. The correct answer, he believed, was the former. “It requires much more observation and study to perfect the shadowing of a picture than in merely drawing the lines of it.” Typically he used an experiment to show why shading is more subtle than line drawing. “The proof of this is that the lines may be traced upon a veil or a flat glass placed between the eye and the object to be imitated. But that cannot be of any use in shadowing, because of the infinite gradation of shades and the blending of them, which does not allow of any precise borders.”15

Leonardo proceeded to write obsessively about shadows. A torrent of more than fifteen thousand words on the topic, which would fill thirty pages of a book, still survives, and that is probably less than half of what he originally wrote. His observations, charts, and diagrams became increasingly complex (figs. 71 and 72). Using his feel for proportional relations, he calculated the effects of light striking contoured objects at varying angles. “If the body is larger than the light, the shadow resembles a truncated and inverted pyramid, and its length has also no defined termination. But if the body is smaller than the light, the shadow will resemble a pyramid and come to an end, as is seen in eclipses of the moon.”

Fig. 71. Study of light hitting a head.



Fig. 72. Study of shadows.



The deft use of shadows became a unifying force in Leonardo’s paintings, distinguishing them from those of other artists of the time. He was especially ingenious in the way he used gradations of color tones to create shadows. The parts of a scene that get the most direct light have the greatest saturated color. This understanding of the relationship between shadows and color tones created a unified coherence to his art.

Having become, by now, a lover of received knowledge as well as a disciple of experience, Leonardo studied Aristotle’s work on shadows and combined it with a variety of ingenious experiments involving different sizes of lamps and objects. He came up with multiple categories of shadows and plotted chapters on each: primary shadows that are caused by direct light hitting an object, derived shadows that result from ambient light diffused through the atmosphere, shadows that are subtly tinged with light reflected from nearby objects, compound shadows cast by multiple sources of light, shadows made by the subdued light at dawn or sunset, shadows made by light that has been filtered through linen or paper, and many other variations. With each category, he included striking observations, such as this: “There is always a space where the light falls and then is reflected back towards its cause; it meets the original shadow and mingles with it and modifies it somewhat.”16

Reading his studies on reflected light provides us with a deeper appreciation for the subtleties of the light-dappled shadow on the edge of Cecilia’s hand in Lady with an Ermine or the Madonna’s hand in Virgin of the Rocks, and it reminds us why these are innovative masterpieces. Studying the paintings, in turn, leads to a more profound understanding of Leonardo’s scientific inquiry into rebounding and reflected light. This iterative process was true for him as well: his analysis of nature informed his art, which informed his analysis of nature.17





SHAPES WITHOUT LINES


Leonardo’s reliance on shadows, rather than contour lines, to define the shape of most objects stemmed from a radical insight, one that he derived from both observation and mathematics: there was no such thing in nature as a precisely visible outline or border to an object. It was not just our way of perceiving objects that made their borders look blurred. He realized that nature itself, independent of how our eyes perceive it, does not have precise lines.

In his mathematical studies, he made a distinction between numerical quantities, which involve discrete and indivisible units, and continuous quantities of the sort found in geometry, which involve measurements and gradations that are infinitely divisible. Shadows are in the latter category; they come in continuous, seamless gradations rather than in discrete units that can be delineated. “Between light and darkness there is infinite variation, because their quantity is continuous,” he wrote.18

That was not a radical proposition. But Leonardo then took a further step. Nothing in nature, he realized, has precise mathematical lines or boundaries or borders. “Lines are not part of any quantity of an object’s surface, nor are they part of the air which surrounds this surface,” he wrote. He realized that points and lines are mathematical constructs. They do not have a physical presence. They are infinitely small. “The line has in itself neither matter nor substance and may rather be called an imaginary idea than a real object; and this being its nature it occupies no space.”

This theory—based on a Leonardesque blend of observation, optics, and mathematics—reinforced his belief that artists should not use lines in their paintings. “Do not edge contours with a definite outline, because the contours are lines, and they are invisible, not only from a distance, but also close at hand,” he wrote. “If the line and also the mathematical point are invisible, the outlines of things, also being lines, are invisible, even when they are near at hand.” Instead an artist needs to represent the shape and volume of objects by relying on light and shadow. “The line forming the boundary of a surface is of invisible thickness. Therefore, O painter, do not surround your bodies with lines.”19 This was an upending of the Florentine tradition known as disegno lineamentum, praised by Vasari, which was founded on linear precision in drawing and the use of lines to create forms and designs.

Leonardo’s insistence that all boundaries, both in nature and in art, are blurred led him to become the pioneer of sfumato, the technique of using hazy and smoky outlines such as those so notable in the Mona Lisa. Sfumato is not merely a technique for modeling reality more accurately in a painting. It is an analogy for the blurry distinction between the known and the mysterious, one of the core themes of Leonardo’s life. Just as he blurred the boundaries between art and science, he did so to the boundaries between reality and fantasy, between experience and mystery, between objects and their surroundings.





OPTICS


Leonardo’s realization that there are no precise boundary lines visible in nature was prompted by the observations he made as a painter and by his mathematical knowledge. There was one other cause: his study of optics. Like much of his science, his optics research was begun to help inform his art, but by the 1490s he was pursuing it with a relentless, seemingly insatiable and pure curiosity.

He had originally thought, along with others, that rays of light converged at a single point inside the eye. But he soon became uncomfortable with this idea. A point, like a line, is a mathematical concept that has no size or physical existence in the real world. “If all the images which come to the eye converged in a mathematical point, which is proved to be indivisible,” he wrote, “then all the things in the universe would appear to be one and indivisible.” Instead, he came to believe, correctly, that visual perception occurs along the entire area of the retina. It was an idea he developed from simple experiments as well as dissections of the eye. And it helped him explain why sharp lines are not visible in nature. “The true outlines of opaque bodies are never seen with sharp precision,” he wrote. “This happens because the visual faculty does not occur in a point; it is diffused throughout the pupil [actually the retina] of the eye.”20

One experiment he did, which was drawn from the work of the eleventh-century Arab mathematician Alhazen, was to move a needle closer and closer to one eye. As it gets near, it does not completely block the vision from the eye, as it would if sight were processed in only a single point on the retina. Instead the needle becomes blurry, a transparent fog. “If you place a sewing needle in front of the pupil as near to the eye as possible, you will see that the perception of any object placed behind this needle at however great a distance will not be impeded.”21 That is because the needle is narrower than the pupil (the hole in the center of the eye that allows light to come in) and the retina (the layer at the back of the eyeball that passes light impulses to the brain). The far left and right of the eye can still pick up light coming from objects behind the needle. Likewise, the eye cannot see a border of an object even if it is up close because different parts of the eye catch the light from the object and its surroundings slightly differently.

One question that stymied him was why images do not appear to be reversed and inverted in our brains. He had studied a device known as a camera obscura, and he knew that the image it produces is upside down and reversed because the lines from the object cross as they go through the aperture. Mistakenly, he assumed that somewhere deep in the eye or brain is another aperture that rights the image. He did not realize that the brain itself can make that adjustment, although his own ability to write and read in mirror script should have provided a clue.

The question of how images turn right-side up after passing through the eye prompted Leonardo to pursue dissections of human and cow eyes and then map the path of visual perceptions from the eyeball to the brain. In one astonishing page of drawings and notes (fig. 73), he shows a view looking down into a skull with its top sawed open. It has the eyeballs in front, and below them are the optic nerves and the x-shaped optic chiasma formed by the nerves on their way to the brain. On the sheet, he described his method:

Ease away the brain substance from the borders of the dura mater [the hardest of the three membranes surrounding the brain]. . . . Then note all the places where the dura mater penetrates the basilar bone with nerves ensheathed in it, together with the pia mater [the innermost of the three membranes surrounding the brain]. And you will acquire such knowledge with certainty when you diligently raise the pia mater, little by little, commencing from the edges and noting bit by bit, the situation of the perforations, commencing first from the right or left side, and drawing this in its entirety.22

Fig. 73. A view into the skull.



One problem he faced in dissecting an eyeball was that it tended to change shape when cut. So he came up with an inventive way to solve the problem: “One should place the whole eye in an egg white, boil it until it becomes solid, and cut the egg and the eye transversely in order that none of the middle portion of the eye be poured out.”

Leonardo’s optics experiments produced discoveries that would not be rediscovered for another century.23 In addition, they were important in honing his ability to match theory with experiment, and they became an underpinning of his studies on perspective.





PERSPECTIVE


Leonardo realized that the art of painting and the science of optics were inseparable from the study of perspective. Along with the proper ability to deploy shadows, the mastery of various types of perspective allowed painters to convey a three-dimensional beauty on a flat surface. A true understanding of perspective involved more than merely a formulaic approach to sizing objects correctly; he knew it also required studying the science of optics. “Painting is based on perspective,” he wrote, “and perspective is nothing else than a thorough knowledge of the function of the eye.” So while he was composing his planned treatises on painting and optics, he also gathered ideas for one on perspective.24

The field had been well studied. Alhazen had written on the optical science of perspective, and the application of perspective theory to painting had been refined by Leonardo’s artistic predecessors, including Giotto, Ghiberti, Masaccio, Uccello, and Donatello. The most important advances came from Brunelleschi, with his famous experiment using a mirror to compare his painting of Florence’s Baptistery with the real view, and were codified by Alberti in his masterful On Painting.

In his early days in Florence, Leonardo had wrestled with the mathematics of perspective in his preparatory drawing for the Adoration of the Magi. The grid he sketched was such a rigorous application of Alberti’s concepts that it looks labored, especially in contrast to the delightfully fanciful motions of the sketched horse and camel. Not surprisingly, when he began work on what was supposed to be the final painting, he adjusted the proportions to present a more imaginative picture in which the linear perspective does not constrain the sense of motion and fantasy.

As with many other subjects, Leonardo’s serious work on perspective was stimulated in the early 1490s when he became a full participant in the intellectual hothouse surrounding the ducal court in Milan. On his visit to the university in nearby Pavia in 1490 (the same trip that resulted in Vitruvian Man), he discussed optics and perspective with Fazio Cardano, a professor who had edited the first printed edition of the study of perspective written by John Peckham in the thirteenth century.

Leonardo’s notes on perspective are mixed in with his notes on optics and painting, but he seemed to be considering a separate treatise on the subject. The sixteenth-century artist Benvenuto Cellini said that he owned a manuscript on perspective by Leonardo, which he described as “the most beautiful a man ever made, showing how objects foreshorten not only in depth but also in breadth and height.” Lomazzo called it “written very obscurely.” Many of his precepts on perspective have survived, but alas, not this manuscript.25

Leonardo’s most important contribution to the study of perspective was to broaden the concept to include not just linear perspective, which uses geometry to figure out the relative sizes of objects in the foreground and background of a painting, but also ways of conveying depth through changes in color and clarity. “There are three branches of perspective,” he wrote. “The first deals with the apparent diminution of objects as they recede from the eye. . . . The second addresses the way colors vary as they recede from the eye. The third is concerned with how the objects in a picture ought to be less detailed as they become more remote.”26

For linear perspective, he accepted the standard rule of proportion: an object that is twice as far from the eye as another object “will appear half the size of the first, though they be of the same size really, and as the space doubles the diminution will double.” He realized that this rule applies to a painting of normal size, one in which the edges are not significantly farther away from the viewer than is the center. But what about a big fresco or mural? One edge might be twice as far from the viewer as the center of the picture is. “Complex perspective,” as he called it, occurs when “no surface can be seen exactly as it is because the eye that sees it is not equally remote from all its edges.” A wall-size painting, as he would soon show, requires a mix of natural perspective with “artificial perspective.” He drew a diagram and explained, “In artificial perspective when objects of unequal size are placed at various distances, the smallest is nearer to the eye than the largest.”27

His work on linear perspective was not groundbreaking; Alberti had explained much the same. But Leonardo was more innovative when he focused on acuity perspective, which describes how objects far away become less distinct. “You must diminish the sharpness of those objects in proportion to their increasing distance from the eye of the spectator,” he instructed. “The parts that are near in the foreground should be finished in a bold determined manner; but those in the distance must be unfinished, and confused in their outlines.” Because things appear smaller at a distance, he explained, the tiny details of an object vanish, and then even larger details begin to vanish. At a great distance, the outlines of the forms are indistinct.28

He used the examples of cities and towers behind walls, where the viewer does not see the base and may not know the size. By making their outlines blurrier, acuity perspective helps to indicate that these structures are in the distance. “How many, in the representation of towns and other objects remote from the eye, express every part of the buildings in the same manner as if they were very near,” he wrote. “It is not so in nature, because it is not possible to perceive at any great distance the precise form of objects. The painter therefore who delineates the outlines and the tiny details of parts, as several have done, will not accurately depict distant objects, but by this error will make them appear exceedingly near.”29

In a small notebook sketch done late in his life, which historian James Ackerman called “a token of one of the most consequential changes in the history of Western art,” Leonardo shows a receding row of trees. Each one loses a little detail, until the ones near the horizon are just a simple shape devoid of individual branches. Even in his botanical drawings and the depiction of plants in some of his paintings, leaves in the foreground are more distinct than those in the background.30

Acuity perspective is related to what Leonardo called aerial perspective: things become blurrier in the distance not only because their details disappear as they become smaller but also because the air and mists soften distant objects. “When objects are distant, there is a great deal of air interposed, which weakens the appearance of forms, and prevents our seeing distinctly the minute parts of such objects,” he wrote. “It behooves the painter therefore to touch those parts slightly, in an unfinished manner.”31

We can see Leonardo experimenting with this concept in many of his drawings. A preliminary sketch of a stampede of horses done for the Battle of Anghiari shows those in the foreground drawn with great clarity and sharp focus, while those in the background are softer and less distinct. The effect, as often with Leonardo, is to convey a perception of movement in a still piece of art.

Just as details diminish as objects get more distant, so do colors. To render a scene correctly requires attending to both. “The eye can never arrive at a perfect knowledge of the interval between two objects by means of the linear perspective alone, if not assisted by the perspective of colors,” he wrote. “Let the colors vanish in proportion as the objects diminish in size, according to the distance.”32

Once again he blended theory and experiment. Using a pane of glass, he traced the outline of a nearby tree and then on paper colored it precisely. Then he did the same for a tree at a distance and then another one at double the distance. It will thus be possible, he wrote, to see how color diminishes in tandem with size.33

Leonardo’s investigations of light and color were successful because he cared about the science as optics. Other perspective theorists, such as Brunelleschi and Alberti, wanted to know how objects could be projected onto a flat panel. Leonardo pursued that knowledge as well, but it led him to another level: he wanted to know how light from objects enter the eye and are processed by the mind.

By pursuing science that went well beyond its utility for painting a picture, Leonardo could have fallen prey to academism. Some critics have suggested that his excess of diagrams showing light hitting contoured objects and his deluge of notes about shadows were at best a waste of time and at worst led him to be too studied in some later works. To disprove that, you only need to look at Ginevra de’ Benci and then the Mona Lisa to see how a profound understanding of light and shadow, both intuitive and scientific, led to the latter being the historic masterpiece. And to be convinced that he could be flexible and clever in bending the rules of perspective given the needs of a complex situation, one only has to look at, and marvel at, The Last Supper.34

Fig. 74. The Last Supper.





